12 • Chapter Review

(long straight wire) where I is the
current, R is the shortest distance to the wire,
and the constant
is the
permeability of free space.
• The direction of the magnetic field created by a
long straight wire is given by right-hand rule 2
(RHR-2): Point the thumb of the right hand in the
direction of current, and the fingers curl in the
direction of the magnetic field loops created by
it.

533

geometrically convenient path of integration. The
results are consistent with the Biot-Savart law.
12.6 Solenoids and Toroids
• The magnetic field strength inside a solenoid is
where n is the number of loops per unit length of
the solenoid. The field inside is very uniform in
magnitude and direction.
• The magnetic field strength inside a toroid is

12.3 Magnetic Force between Two Parallel Currents
• The force between two parallel currents
and
separated by a distance r, has a magnitude
per unit length given by
• The force is attractive if the currents are in the
same direction, repulsive if they are in opposite
directions.
12.4 Magnetic Field of a Current Loop
• The magnetic field strength at the center of a
circular loop is given by
where R is the
radius of the loop. RHR-2 gives the direction of
the field about the loop.
12.5 Ampère’s Law
• The magnetic field created by current following
any path is the sum (or integral) of the fields due
to segments along the path (magnitude and
direction as for a straight wire), resulting in a
general relationship between current and field
known as Ampère’s law.
• Ampère’s law can be used to determine the
magnetic field from a thin wire or thick wire by a

where N is the number of windings. The field
inside a toroid is not uniform and varies with the
distance as 1/r.
12.7 Magnetism in Matter
• Materials are classified as paramagnetic,
diamagnetic, or ferromagnetic, depending on
how they behave in an applied magnetic field.
• Paramagnetic materials have partial alignment of
their magnetic dipoles with an applied magnetic
field. This is a positive magnetic susceptibility.
Only a surface current remains, creating a
solenoid-like magnetic field.
• Diamagnetic materials exhibit induced dipoles
opposite to an applied magnetic field. This is a
negative magnetic susceptibility.
• Ferromagnetic materials have groups of dipoles,
called domains, which align with the applied
magnetic field. However, when the field is
removed, the ferromagnetic material remains
magnetized, unlike paramagnetic materials. This
magnetization of the material versus the applied
field effect is called hysteresis.

Conceptual Questions
12.1 The Biot-Savart Law
1. For calculating magnetic fields, what are the
advantages and disadvantages of the Biot-Savart
law?
2. Describe the magnetic field due to the current in
two wires connected to the two terminals of a
source of emf and twisted tightly around each
other.
3. How can you decide if a wire is infinite?
4. Identical currents are carried in two circular
loops; however, one loop has twice the diameter
as the other loop. Compare the magnetic fields

created by the loops at the center of each loop.
12.2 Magnetic Field Due to a Thin Straight Wire
5. How would you orient two long, straight,
current-carrying wires so that there is no net
magnetic force between them? (Hint: What
orientation would lead to one wire not
experiencing a magnetic field from the other?)
12.3 Magnetic Force between Two Parallel Currents
6. Compare and contrast the electric field of an
infinite line of charge and the magnetic field of
an infinite line of current.
7. Is

constant in magnitude for points that lie on

534

12 • Chapter Review

a magnetic field line?
12.4 Magnetic Field of a Current Loop
8. Is the magnetic field of a current loop uniform?
9. What happens to the length of a suspended
spring when a current passes through it?
10. Two concentric circular wires with different
diameters carry currents in the same direction.
Describe the force on the inner wire.
12.5 Ampère’s Law
11. Is Ampère’s law valid for all closed paths? Why
isn’t it normally useful for calculating a magnetic
field?

12.6 Solenoids and Toroids
12. Is the magnetic field inside a toroid completely
uniform? Almost uniform?
13. Explain why
inside a long, hollow copper
pipe that is carrying an electric current parallel
to the axis. Is

outside the pipe?

12.7 Magnetism in Matter
14. A diamagnetic material is brought close to a
permanent magnet. What happens to the
material?
15. If you cut a bar magnet into two pieces, will you
end up with one magnet with an isolated north
pole and another magnet with an isolated south
pole? Explain your answer.

Problems
12.1 The Biot-Savart Law
16. A 10-A current flows through the wire shown. What
is the magnitude of the magnetic field due to a
0.5-mm segment of wire as measured at (a) point A
and (b) point B?

17. Ten amps flow through a square loop where
each side is 20 cm in length. At each corner of
the loop is a 0.01-cm segment that connects the
longer wires as shown. Calculate the magnitude
of the magnetic field at the center of the loop.

19. The accompanying figure shows a current loop
consisting of two concentric circular arcs and
two perpendicular radial lines. Determine the
magnetic field at point P.

20. Find the magnetic field at the center C of the
rectangular loop of wire shown in the
accompanying figure.

18. What is the magnetic field at P due to the
current I in the wire shown?

Access for free at openstax.org

12 • Chapter Review

535

downward, what is the resultant magnitude of
the magnetic field 20 cm above the wire? 20 cm
below the wire?
26. The two long, parallel wires shown in the
accompanying figure carry currents in the same
direction. If
and
what is
the magnetic field at point P?

21. Two long wires, one of which has a semicircular
bend of radius R, are positioned as shown in the
accompanying figure. If both wires carry a
current I, how far apart must their parallel
sections be so that the net magnetic field at P is
zero? Does the current in the straight wire flow
up or down?

27. The accompanying figure shows two long, straight,
horizontal wires that are parallel and a distance 2a
apart. If both wires carry current I in the same
direction, (a) what is the magnetic field at
(b)

12.2 Magnetic Field Due to a Thin Straight Wire
22. A typical current in a lightning bolt is
A.
Estimate the magnetic field 1 m from the bolt.
23. The magnitude of the magnetic field 50 cm from
a long, thin, straight wire is
What is the
current through the long wire?
24. A transmission line strung 7.0 m above the
ground carries a current of 500 A. What is the
magnetic field on the ground directly below the
wire? Compare your answer with the magnetic
field of Earth.
25. A long, straight, horizontal wire carries a left-toright current of 20 A. If the wire is placed in a
uniform magnetic field of magnitude
that is directed vertically

28. Repeat the calculations of the preceding
problem with the direction of the current in the
lower wire reversed.
29. Consider the area between the wires of the
preceding problem. At what distance from the
top wire is the net magnetic field a minimum?
Assume that the currents are equal and flow in
opposite directions.
12.3 Magnetic Force between Two Parallel Currents
30. Two long, straight wires are parallel and 25 cm

536

12 • Chapter Review

apart. (a) If each wire carries a current of 50 A in
the same direction, what is the magnetic force
per meter exerted on each wire? (b) Does the
force pull the wires together or push them
apart? (c) What happens if the currents flow in
opposite directions?
31. Two long, straight wires are parallel and 10 cm
apart. One carries a current of 2.0 A, the other a
current of 5.0 A. (a) If the two currents flow in
opposite directions, what is the magnitude and
direction of the force per unit length of one wire
on the other? (b) What is the magnitude and
direction of the force per unit length if the
currents flow in the same direction?
32. Two long, parallel wires are hung by cords of length
5.0 cm, as shown in the accompanying figure. Each
wire has a mass per unit length of 30 g/m, and they
carry the same current in opposite directions. What
is the current if the cords hang at
with respect
to the vertical?

12.4 Magnetic Field of a Current Loop
35. When the current through a circular loop is 6.0
A, the magnetic field at its center is
What is the radius of the loop?
36. How many turns must be wound on a flat,
circular coil of radius 20 cm in order to produce
a magnetic field of magnitude
at
the center of the coil when the current through it
is 0.85 A?
37. A flat, circular loop has 20 turns. The radius of
the loop is 10.0 cm and the current through the
wire is 0.50 A. Determine the magnitude of the
magnetic field at the center of the loop.

33. A circuit with current I has two long parallel wire
sections that carry current in opposite
directions. Find magnetic field at a point P near
these wires that is a distance a from one wire
and b from the other wire as shown in the figure.

38. A circular loop of radius R carries a current I. At
what distance along the axis of the loop is the
magnetic field one-half its value at the center of
the loop?
39. Two flat, circular coils, each with a radius R and
wound with N turns, are mounted along the
same axis so that they are parallel a distance d
apart. What is the magnetic field at the midpoint
of the common axis if a current I flows in the
same direction through each coil?
40. For the coils in the preceding problem, what is
the magnetic field at the center of either coil?
12.5 Ampère’s Law

34. The infinite, straight wire shown in the
accompanying figure carries a current
The
rectangular loop, whose long sides are parallel
to the wire, carries a current
What are the
magnitude and direction of the force on the
rectangular loop due to the magnetic field of the
wire?

Access for free at openstax.org

41. A current I flows around the rectangular loop
shown in the accompanying figure. Evaluate
for the paths A, B, C, and D.

12 • Chapter Review

42. Evaluate

for each of the cases shown in

the accompanying figure.

537

44. A superconducting wire of diameter 0.25 cm
carries a current of 1000 A. What is the
magnetic field just outside the wire?
45. A long, straight wire of radius R carries a current
I that is distributed uniformly over the crosssection of the wire. At what distance from the
axis of the wire is the magnitude of the magnetic
field a maximum?
46. The accompanying figure shows a cross-section
of a long, hollow, cylindrical conductor of inner
radius
and outer radius
A 50-A current distributed
uniformly over the cross-section flows into the
page. Calculate the magnetic field at

47. A long, solid, cylindrical conductor of radius 3.0
cm carries a current of 50 A distributed
uniformly over its cross-section. Plot the
magnetic field as a function of the radial
distance r from the center of the conductor.
43. The coil whose lengthwise cross section is shown in
the accompanying figure carries a current I and has
N evenly spaced turns distributed along the length l.
Evaluate

for the paths indicated.

48. A portion of a long, cylindrical coaxial cable is shown
in the accompanying figure. A current I flows down
the center conductor, and this current is returned in
the outer conductor. Determine the magnetic field in
the regions (a)
(b)
(c)
and (d)
Assume that the
current is distributed uniformly over the cross
sections of the two parts of the cable.

538

12 • Chapter Review

12.6 Solenoids and Toroids
49. A solenoid is wound with 2000 turns per meter.
When the current is 5.2 A, what is the magnetic
field within the solenoid?
50. A solenoid has 12 turns per centimeter. What
current will produce a magnetic field of
within the solenoid?
51. If a current is 2.0 A, how many turns per
centimeter must be wound on a solenoid in
order to produce a magnetic field of
within it?
52. A solenoid is 40 cm long, has a diameter of 3.0
cm, and is wound with 500 turns. If the current
through the windings is 4.0 A, what is the
magnetic field at a point on the axis of the
solenoid that is (a) at the center of the solenoid,
(b) 10.0 cm from one end of the solenoid, and (c)
5.0 cm from one end of the solenoid? (d)
Compare these answers with the infinitesolenoid case.

53. Determine the magnetic field on the central axis
at the opening of a semi-infinite solenoid. (That
is, take the opening to be at
and the other
end to be at

∞)
54. By how much is the approximation

Access for free at openstax.org

in

12 • Chapter Review

539

error at the center of a solenoid that is 15.0 cm
long, has a diameter of 4.0 cm, is wrapped with
n turns per meter, and carries a current I?

2000 turns per meter. What is the magnetic field
inside the solenoid if its core is (a) a vacuum and
(b) filled with liquid oxygen at 90 K?

55. A solenoid with 25 turns per centimeter carries a
current I. An electron moves within the solenoid
in a circle that has a radius of 2.0 cm and is
perpendicular to the axis of the solenoid. If the
speed of the electron is
what is
I?

61. The magnetic dipole moment of the iron atom is
about
(a) Calculate the
maximum magnetic dipole moment of a domain
consisting of
iron atoms. (b) What current
would have to flow through a single circular loop
of wire of diameter 1.0 cm to produce this
magnetic dipole moment?

56. A toroid has 250 turns of wire and carries a
current of 20 A. Its inner and outer radii are 8.0
and 9.0 cm. What are the values of its magnetic
field at
and
57. A toroid with a square cross section 3.0 cm
3.0 cm has an inner radius of 25.0 cm. It is
wound with 500 turns of wire, and it carries a
current of 2.0 A. What is the strength of the
magnetic field at the center of the square cross
section?
12.7 Magnetism in Matter
58. The magnetic field in the core of an air-filled
solenoid is 1.50 T. By how much will this
magnetic field decrease if the air is pumped out
of the core while the current is held constant?
59. A solenoid has a ferromagnetic core, n = 1000
turns per meter, and I = 5.0 A. If B inside the
solenoid is 2.0 T, what is for the core material?

62. Suppose you wish to produce a 1.2-T magnetic
field in a toroid with an iron core for which
The toroid has a mean radius of
15 cm and is wound with 500 turns. What
current is required?
63. A current of 1.5 A flows through the windings of
a large, thin toroid with 200 turns per meter and
a radius of 1 meter. If the toroid is filled with iron
for which
what is the magnetic
field within it?
64. A solenoid with an iron core is 25 cm long and is
wrapped with 100 turns of wire. When the
current through the solenoid is 10 A, the
magnetic field inside it is 2.0 T. For this current,
what is the permeability of the iron? If the
current is turned off and then restored to 10 A,
will the magnetic field necessarily return to 2.0
T?

60. A 20-A current flows through a solenoid with

Additional Problems
65. Three long, straight, parallel wires, all carrying 20 A,
are positioned as shown in the accompanying figure.
What is the magnitude of the magnetic field at the
point P?

66. A current I flows around a wire bent into the

shape of a square of side a. What is the magnetic
field at the point P that is a distance z above the
center of the square (see the accompanying
figure)?

67. The accompanying figure shows a long, straight wire

540

12 • Chapter Review

carrying a current of 10 A. What is the magnetic
force on an electron at the instant it is 20 cm from
the wire, traveling parallel to the wire with a speed
of
Describe qualitatively the
subsequent motion of the electron.

68. Current flows along a thin, infinite sheet as
shown in the accompanying figure. The current
per unit length along the sheet is J in amperes
per meter. (a) Use the Biot-Savart law to show
that
on either side of the sheet.
What is the direction of on each side? (b) Now
use Ampère’s law to calculate the field.

69. (a) Use the result of the previous problem to
calculate the magnetic field between, above,
and below the pair of infinite sheets shown in
the accompanying figure. (b) Repeat your
calculations if the direction of the current in the
lower sheet is reversed.

70. We often assume that the magnetic field is
uniform in a region and zero everywhere else.
Show that in reality it is impossible for a
magnetic field to drop abruptly to zero, as
illustrated in the accompanying figure. (Hint:
Apply Ampère’s law over the path shown.)

Access for free at openstax.org

71. How is the fractional change in the strength of
the magnetic field across the face of the toroid
related to the fractional change in the radial
distance from the axis of the toroid?
72. Show that the expression for the magnetic field
of a toroid reduces to that for the field of an
infinite solenoid in the limit that the central
radius goes to infinity.
73. A toroid with an inner radius of 20 cm and an
outer radius of 22 cm is tightly wound with one
layer of wire that has a diameter of 0.25 mm. (a)
How many turns are there on the toroid? (b) If
the current through the toroid windings is 2.0 A,
what is the strength of the magnetic field at the
center of the toroid?
74. A wire element has
where A and dv are the cross-sectional area and
volume of the element, respectively. Use this,
the Biot-Savart law, and
to show that
the magnetic field of a moving point charge q is
given by:

75. A reasonably uniform magnetic field over a
limited region of space can be produced with the
Helmholtz coil, which consists of two parallel
coils centered on the same axis. The coils are
connected so that they carry the same current I.
Each coil has N turns and radius R, which is also
the distance between the coils. (a) Find the
magnetic field at any point on the z-axis shown
in the accompanying figure. (b) Show that dB/dz
and
are both zero at z = 0. (These
vanishing derivatives demonstrate that the
magnetic field varies only slightly near z = 0.)

12 • Chapter Review

541

80. The current density in the long, cylindrical wire
shown in the accompanying figure varies with
distance r from the center of the wire according to
where c is a constant. (a) What is the
current through the wire? (b) What is the magnetic
field produced by this current for
For

76. A charge of
is distributed uniformly
around a thin ring of insulating material. The ring
has a radius of 0.20 m and rotates at
around the axis that passes
through its center and is perpendicular to the
plane of the ring. What is the magnetic field at
the center of the ring?
77. A thin, nonconducting disk of radius R is free to
rotate around the axis that passes through its
center and is perpendicular to the face of the
disk. The disk is charged uniformly with a total
charge q. If the disk rotates at a constant
angular velocity
what is the magnetic field at
its center?
78. Consider the disk in the previous problem.
Calculate the magnetic field at a point on its
central axis that is a distance y above the disk.
79. Consider the axial magnetic field
of the circular
current loop shown below. (a) Evaluate
Also show that

∞

(b) Can you deduce this

limit without evaluating the integral? (Hint: See
the accompanying figure.)

81. A long, straight, cylindrical conductor contains a
cylindrical cavity whose axis is displaced by a
from the axis of the conductor, as shown in the
accompanying figure. The current density in the
conductor is given by

where

is a

constant and is along the axis of the
conductor. Calculate the magnetic field at an
arbitrary point P in the cavity by superimposing
the field of a solid cylindrical conductor with
radius
and current density onto the field of
a solid cylindrical conductor with radius
and
current density
Then use the fact that the
appropriate azimuthal unit vectors can be
expressed as
and
to show that everywhere inside the cavity the
magnetic field is given by the constant
where

and

is the position of P relative to the
center of the conductor and
is the
position of P relative to the center of the cavity.

542

12 • Chapter Review

85. A very long, thick cylindrical wire of radius R
carries a current density J that varies across its
cross-section. The magnitude of the current
density at a point a distance r from the center of
the wire is given by
where
is a
82. Between the two ends of a horseshoe magnet
the field is uniform as shown in the diagram. As
you move out to outside edges, the field bends.
Show by Ampère’s law that the field must bend
and thereby the field weakens due to these
bends.

constant. Find the magnetic field (a) at a point
outside the wire and (b) at a point inside the
wire. Write your answer in terms of the net
current I through the wire.
86. A very long, cylindrical wire of radius a has a
circular hole of radius b in it at a distance d from
the center. The wire carries a uniform current of
magnitude I through it. The direction of the
current in the figure is out of the paper. Find the
magnetic field (a) at a point at the edge of the
hole closest to the center of the thick wire, (b) at
an arbitrary point inside the hole, and (c) at an
arbitrary point outside the wire. (Hint: Think of
the hole as a sum of two wires carrying current
in the opposite directions.)

83. Show that the magnetic field of a thin wire and
that of a current loop are zero if you are infinitely
far away.
84. An Ampère loop is chosen as shown by dashed
lines for a parallel constant magnetic field as
shown by solid arrows. Calculate

for each

side of the loop then find the entire
Can you think of an Ampère loop that would
make the problem easier? Do those results
match these?

Access for free at openstax.org

87. Magnetic field inside a torus. Consider a torus of
rectangular cross-section with inner radius a and
outer radius b. N turns of an insulated thin wire are
wound evenly on the torus tightly all around the
torus and connected to a battery producing a
steady current I in the wire. Assume that the
current on the top and bottom surfaces in the
figure is radial, and the current on the inner and
outer radii surfaces is vertical. Find the magnetic
field inside the torus as a function of radial
distance r from the axis.

12 • Chapter Review

543

are connected to a battery of voltage V. The
inner tube has inner radius a and outer radius b,
and the outer tube has inner radius c and outer
radius d. The tubes are then disconnected from
the battery and rotated in the same direction at
angular speed of radians per second about
their common axis. Find the magnetic field (a) at
a point inside the space enclosed by the inner
tube
and (b) at a point between the tubes
and (c) at a point outside the tubes
(Hint: Think of copper tubes as a
capacitor and find the charge density based on
the voltage applied,
88. Two long coaxial copper tubes, each of length L,

Challenge Problems
89. The accompanying figure shows a flat, infinitely long
sheet of width a that carries a current I uniformly
distributed across it. Find the magnetic field at the
point P, which is in the plane of the sheet and at a
distance x from one edge. Test your result for the
limit

90. A hypothetical current flowing in the z-direction
creates the field

in

the rectangular region of the xy-plane shown in
the accompanying figure. Use Ampère’s law to
find the current through the rectangle.

91. A nonconducting hard rubber circular disk of
radius R is painted with a uniform surface charge
density It is rotated about its axis with
angular speed
(a) Find the magnetic field
produced at a point on the axis a distance h
meters from the center of the disk. (b) Find the
numerical value of magnitude of the magnetic
field when
and
and compare it with the
magnitude of magnetic field of Earth, which is
about 1/2 Gauss.

544

12 • Chapter Review

Access for free at openstax.org

CHAPTER 13

Electromagnetic Induction

FIGURE 13.1 The black strip found on the back of credit cards and driver’s licenses is a very thin layer of magnetic material with
information stored on it. Reading and writing the information on the credit card is done with a swiping motion. The physical reason why
this is necessary is called electromagnetic induction and is discussed in this chapter. (credit: modification of work by Jane Whitney)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
13.1 Faraday’s Law
13.2 Lenz's Law
13.3 Motional Emf
13.4 Induced Electric Fields
13.5 Eddy Currents
13.6 Electric Generators and Back Emf
13.7 Applications of Electromagnetic Induction
INTRODUCTION We have been considering electric fields created by fixed charge distributions and magnetic fields
produced by constant currents, but electromagnetic phenomena are not restricted to these stationary situations.
Most of the interesting applications of electromagnetism are, in fact, time-dependent. To investigate some of these
applications, we now remove the time-independent assumption that we have been making and allow the fields to
vary with time. In this and the next several chapters, you will see a wonderful symmetry in the behavior exhibited by
time-varying electric and magnetic fields. Mathematically, this symmetry is expressed by an additional term in
Ampère’s law and by another key equation of electromagnetism called Faraday’s law. We also discuss how moving a
wire through a magnetic field produces an emf or voltage. Lastly, we describe applications of these principles, such
as the card reader shown above.

546

13 • Electromagnetic Induction

13.1 Faraday’s Law
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Determine the magnetic flux through a surface, knowing the strength of the magnetic field, the surface
area, and the angle between the normal to the surface and the magnetic field
• Use Faraday’s law to determine the magnitude of induced emf in a closed loop due to changing magnetic
flux through the loop
The first productive experiments concerning the effects of time-varying magnetic fields were performed by Michael
Faraday in 1831. One of his early experiments is represented in Figure 13.2. An emf is induced when the magnetic
field in the coil is changed by pushing a bar magnet into or out of the coil. Emfs of opposite signs are produced by
motion in opposite directions, and the directions of emfs are also reversed by reversing poles. The same results are
produced if the coil is moved rather than the magnet—it is the relative motion that is important. The faster the
motion, the greater the emf, and there is no emf when the magnet is stationary relative to the coil.

FIGURE 13.2 Movement of a magnet relative to a coil produces emfs as shown (a–d). The same emfs are produced if the coil is moved
relative to the magnet. This short-lived emf is only present during the motion. The greater the speed, the greater the magnitude of the emf,
and the emf is zero when there is no motion, as shown in (e).

Faraday also discovered that a similar effect can be produced using two circuits—a changing current in one circuit
induces a current in a second, nearby circuit. For example, when the switch is closed in circuit 1 of Figure 13.3(a),
the ammeter needle of circuit 2 momentarily deflects, indicating that a short-lived current surge has been induced
in that circuit. The ammeter needle quickly returns to its original position, where it remains. However, if the switch of
circuit 1 is now suddenly opened, another short-lived current surge in the direction opposite from before is observed
in circuit 2.

Access for free at openstax.org

13.1 • Faraday’s Law

FIGURE 13.3 (a) Closing the switch of circuit 1 produces a short-lived current surge in circuit 2. (b) If the switch remains closed, no current
is observed in circuit 2. (c) Opening the switch again produces a short-lived current in circuit 2 but in the opposite direction from before.

Faraday realized that in both experiments, a current flowed in the circuit containing the ammeter only when the
magnetic field in the region occupied by that circuit was changing. As the magnet of the figure was moved, the
strength of its magnetic field at the loop changed; and when the current in circuit 1 was turned on or off, the
strength of its magnetic field at circuit 2 changed. Faraday was eventually able to interpret these and all other
experiments involving magnetic fields that vary with time in terms of the following law:

FARADAY’S LAW
The emf induced is the negative change in the magnetic flux
per unit time. Any change in the magnetic
field or change in orientation of the area of the coil with respect to the magnetic field induces a voltage (emf).
The magnetic flux is a measurement of the amount of magnetic field lines through a given surface area, as seen in
Figure 13.4. This definition is similar to the electric flux studied earlier. This means that if we have
13.1

then the induced emf or the voltage generated by a conductor or coil moving in a magnetic field is
13.2

The negative sign describes the direction in which the induced emf drives current around a circuit. However, that
direction is most easily determined with a rule known as Lenz’s law, which we will discuss shortly.

FIGURE 13.4 The magnetic flux is the amount of magnetic field lines cutting through a surface area A defined by the unit area vector

If

the angle between the unit area and magnetic field vector are parallel or antiparallel, as shown in the diagram, the magnetic flux is the
highest possible value given the values of area and magnetic field.

Part (a) of Figure 13.5 depicts a circuit and an arbitrary surface S that it bounds. Notice that S is an open surface. It

547

548

13 • Electromagnetic Induction

can be shown that any open surface bounded by the circuit in question can be used to evaluate
is the same for the various surfaces
of part (b) of the figure.

For example,

FIGURE 13.5 (a) A circuit bounding an arbitrary open surface S. The planar area bounded by the circuit is not part of S. (b) Three arbitrary
open surfaces bounded by the same circuit. The value of
is the same for all these surfaces.

The SI unit for magnetic flux is the weber (Wb),

Occasionally, the magnetic field unit is expressed as webers per square meter (
) instead of teslas, based on
this definition. In many practical applications, the circuit of interest consists of a number N of tightly wound turns
(see Figure 13.6). Each turn experiences the same magnetic flux. Therefore, the net magnetic flux through the
circuits is N times the flux through one turn, and Faraday’s law is written as
13.3

EXAMPLE 13.1
A Square Coil in a Changing Magnetic Field
The square coil of Figure 13.6 has sides
long and is tightly wound with
turns of wire. The
resistance of the coil is
The coil is placed in a spatially uniform magnetic field that is directed
perpendicular to the face of the coil and whose magnitude is decreasing at a rate
(a) What is
the magnitude of the emf induced in the coil? (b) What is the magnitude of the current circulating through the coil?

Access for free at openstax.org

13.1 • Faraday’s Law

FIGURE 13.6 A square coil with N turns of wire with uniform magnetic field

directed in the downward direction, perpendicular to the coil.

Strategy
The area vector, or

direction, is perpendicular to area covering the loop. We will choose this to be pointing

downward so that is parallel to and that the flux turns into multiplication of magnetic field times area. The area
of the loop is not changing in time, so it can be factored out of the time derivative, leaving the magnetic field as the
only quantity varying in time. Lastly, we can apply Ohm’s law once we know the induced emf to find the current in
the loop.
Solution
a. The flux through one turn is
so we can calculate the magnitude of the emf from Faraday’s law. The sign of the emf will be discussed in the
next section, on Lenz’s law:

b. The magnitude of the current induced in the coil is

Significance
If the area of the loop were changing in time, we would not be able to pull it out of the time derivative. Since the loop
is a closed path, the result of this current would be a small amount of heating of the wires until the magnetic field
stops changing. This may increase the area of the loop slightly as the wires are heated.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 13.1
A closely wound coil has a radius of 4.0 cm, 50 turns, and a total resistance of
. At what rate must a magnetic
field perpendicular to the face of the coil change in order to produce heating in the coil at a rate of 2.0 mW?

549

550

13 • Electromagnetic Induction

13.2 Lenz's Law
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Use Lenz’s law to determine the direction of induced emf whenever a magnetic flux changes
• Use Faraday’s law with Lenz’s law to determine the induced emf in a coil and in a solenoid
The direction in which the induced emf drives current around a wire loop can be found through the negative sign.
However, it is usually easier to determine this direction with Lenz’s law, named in honor of its discoverer, Heinrich
Lenz (1804–1865). (Faraday also discovered this law, independently of Lenz.) We state Lenz’s law as follows:

LENZ’S LAW
The direction of the induced emf drives current around a wire loop to always oppose the change in magnetic flux
that causes the emf.
Lenz’s law can also be considered in terms of conservation of energy. If pushing a magnet into a coil causes current,
the energy in that current must have come from somewhere. If the induced current causes a magnetic field
opposing the increase in field of the magnet we pushed in, then the situation is clear. We pushed a magnet against a
field and did work on the system, and that showed up as current. If it were not the case that the induced field
opposes the change in the flux, the magnet would be pulled in and produce a current without any work. Electric
potential energy would have been created, violating the conservation of energy.
To determine an induced emf , you first calculate the magnetic flux
and then obtain
The magnitude of
is given by
Finally, you can apply Lenz’s law to determine the sense of . This will be developed
through examples that illustrate the following problem-solving strategy.

PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Lenz’s Law
To use Lenz’s law to determine the directions of induced magnetic fields, currents, and emfs:
1. Make a sketch of the situation for use in visualizing and recording directions.
2. Determine the direction of the applied magnetic field
3. Determine whether its magnetic flux is increasing or decreasing.
4. Now determine the direction of the induced magnetic field
The induced magnetic field tries to reinforce a
magnetic flux that is decreasing or opposes a magnetic flux that is increasing. Therefore, the induced
magnetic field adds or subtracts to the applied magnetic field, depending on the change in magnetic flux.
5. Use right-hand rule 2 (RHR-2; see Magnetic Forces and Fields) to determine the direction of the induced
current I that is responsible for the induced magnetic field
6. The direction (or polarity) of the induced emf can now drive a conventional current in this direction.
Let’s apply Lenz’s law to the system of Figure 13.7(a). We designate the “front” of the closed conducting loop as the
region containing the approaching bar magnet, and the “back” of the loop as the other region. As the north pole of
the magnet moves toward the loop, the flux through the loop due to the field of the magnet increases because the
strength of field lines directed from the front to the back of the loop is increasing. A current is therefore induced in
the loop. By Lenz’s law, the direction of the induced current must be such that its own magnetic field is directed in a
way to oppose the changing flux caused by the field of the approaching magnet. Hence, the induced current
circulates so that its magnetic field lines through the loop are directed from the back to the front of the loop. By
RHR-2, place your thumb pointing against the magnetic field lines, which is toward the bar magnet. Your fingers
wrap in a counterclockwise direction as viewed from the bar magnet. Alternatively, we can determine the direction
of the induced current by treating the current loop as an electromagnet that opposes the approach of the north pole
of the bar magnet. This occurs when the induced current flows as shown, for then the face of the loop nearer the

Access for free at openstax.org

13.2 • Lenz's Law

approaching magnet is also a north pole.

FIGURE 13.7 The change in magnetic flux caused by the approaching magnet induces a current in the loop. (a) An approaching north pole
induces a counterclockwise current with respect to the bar magnet. (b) An approaching south pole induces a clockwise current with respect
to the bar magnet.

Part (b) of the figure shows the south pole of a magnet moving toward a conducting loop. In this case, the flux
through the loop due to the field of the magnet increases because the number of field lines directed from the back
to the front of the loop is increasing. To oppose this change, a current is induced in the loop whose field lines
through the loop are directed from the front to the back. Equivalently, we can say that the current flows in a
direction so that the face of the loop nearer the approaching magnet is a south pole, which then repels the
approaching south pole of the magnet. By RHR-2, your thumb points away from the bar magnet. Your fingers wrap in
a clockwise fashion, which is the direction of the induced current.
Another example illustrating the use of Lenz’s law is shown in Figure 13.8. When the switch is opened, the decrease
in current through the solenoid causes a decrease in magnetic flux through its coils, which induces an emf in the
solenoid. This emf must oppose the change (the termination of the current) causing it. Consequently, the induced
emf has the polarity shown and drives in the direction of the original current. This may generate an arc across the
terminals of the switch as it is opened.

FIGURE 13.8 (a) A solenoid connected to a source of emf. (b) Opening switch S terminates the current, which in turn induces an emf in the
solenoid. (c) A potential difference between the ends of the sharply pointed rods is produced by inducing an emf in a coil. This potential
difference is large enough to produce an arc between the sharp points.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 13.2
Find the direction of the induced current in the wire loop shown below as the magnet enters, passes through, and
leaves the loop.

551

552

13 • Electromagnetic Induction

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 13.3
Verify the directions of the induced currents in Figure 13.3.

EXAMPLE 13.2
A Circular Coil in a Changing Magnetic Field
A magnetic field is directed outward perpendicular to the plane of a circular coil of radius
(Figure
13.9). The field is cylindrically symmetrical with respect to the center of the coil, and its magnitude decays
exponentially according to
induced in the coil at the times
these three times if its resistance is

where B is in teslas and t is in seconds. (a) Calculate the emf
and
(b) Determine the current in the coil at

FIGURE 13.9 A circular coil in a decreasing magnetic field.

Strategy
Since the magnetic field is perpendicular to the plane of the coil and constant over each spot in the coil, the dot
product of the magnetic field and normal to the area unit vector turns into a multiplication. The magnetic field
can be pulled out of the integration, leaving the flux as the product of the magnetic field times area. We need to take
the time derivative of the exponential function to calculate the emf using Faraday’s law. Then we use Ohm’s law to
calculate the current.

Access for free at openstax.org

13.2 • Lenz's Law

Solution
a. Since

is perpendicular to the plane of the coil, the magnetic flux is given by

From Faraday’s law, the magnitude of the induced emf is

Since is directed out of the page and is decreasing, the induced current must flow counterclockwise when
viewed from above so that the magnetic field it produces through the coil also points out of the page. For all
three times, the sense of ε is counterclockwise; its magnitudes are
b. From Ohm’s law, the respective currents are

and

Significance
An emf voltage is created by a changing magnetic flux over time. If we know how the magnetic field varies with time
over a constant area, we can take its time derivative to calculate the induced emf.

EXAMPLE 13.3
Changing Magnetic Field Inside a Solenoid
The current through the windings of a solenoid with
turns per meter is changing at a rate
(See Sources of Magnetic Fields for a discussion of solenoids.) The solenoid is 50-cm long and has a cross-sectional
diameter of 3.0 cm. A small coil consisting of
closely wound turns wrapped in a circle of diameter 1.0 cm is
placed in the middle of the solenoid such that the plane of the coil is perpendicular to the central axis of the
solenoid. Assuming that the infinite-solenoid approximation is valid at the location of the small coil, determine the
magnitude of the emf induced in the coil.
Strategy
The magnetic field in the middle of the solenoid is a uniform value of
This field is producing a maximum
magnetic flux through the coil as it is directed along the length of the solenoid. Therefore, the magnetic flux through
the coil is the product of the solenoid’s magnetic field times the area of the coil. Faraday’s law involves a time
derivative of the magnetic flux. The only quantity varying in time is the current, the rest can be pulled out of the time
derivative. Lastly, we include the number of turns in the coil to determine the induced emf in the coil.
Solution
Since the field of the solenoid is given by

the flux through each turn of the small coil is

where d is the diameter of the coil. Now from Faraday’s law, the magnitude of the emf induced in the coil is

553

554

13 • Electromagnetic Induction

Significance
When the current is turned on in a vertical solenoid, as shown in Figure 13.10, the ring has an induced emf from the
solenoid’s changing magnetic flux that opposes the change. The result is that the ring is fired vertically into the air.

FIGURE 13.10 The jumping ring. When a current is turned on in the vertical solenoid, a current is induced in the metal ring. The stray field
produced by the solenoid causes the ring to jump off the solenoid.

INTERACTIVE
Visit this website (https://openstax.org/l/21mitjumpring) for a demonstration of the jumping ring from MIT.

13.3 Motional Emf
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Determine the magnitude of an induced emf in a wire moving at a constant speed through a magnetic
field
• Discuss examples that use motional emf, such as a rail gun and a tethered satellite
Magnetic flux depends on three factors: the strength of the magnetic field, the area through which the field lines
pass, and the orientation of the field with the surface area. If any of these quantities varies, a corresponding
variation in magnetic flux occurs. So far, we’ve only considered flux changes due to a changing field. Now we look at
another possibility: a changing area through which the field lines pass including a change in the orientation of the

Access for free at openstax.org

13.3 • Motional Emf

area.
Two examples of this type of flux change are represented in Figure 13.11. In part (a), the flux through the
rectangular loop increases as it moves into the magnetic field, and in part (b), the flux through the rotating coil varies
with the angle .

FIGURE 13.11 (a) Magnetic flux changes as a loop moves into a magnetic field; (b) magnetic flux changes as a loop rotates in a magnetic
field.

Now let’s look at a conducting rod pulled in a circuit, changing magnetic flux. The area enclosed by the circuit
‘MNOP’ of Figure 13.12 is lx and is perpendicular to the magnetic field, so we can simplify the integration of
Equation 13.1 into a multiplication of magnetic field and area. The magnetic flux through the open surface is
therefore

13.4

Since B and l are constant and the velocity of the rod is
we can now restate Faraday’s law, Equation 13.2,
for the magnitude of the emf in terms of the moving conducting rod as
13.5

The current induced in the circuit is the emf divided by the resistance or

Furthermore, the direction of the induced emf satisfies Lenz’s law, as you can verify by inspection of the figure.
This calculation of motionally induced emf is not restricted to a rod moving on conducting rails. With
as
the starting point, it can be shown that
holds for any change in flux caused by the motion of a
conductor. We saw in Faraday’s Law that the emf induced by a time-varying magnetic field obeys this same
relationship, which is Faraday’s law. Thus Faraday’s law holds for all flux changes, whether they are produced by a
changing magnetic field, by motion, or by a combination of the two.

555

556

13 • Electromagnetic Induction

FIGURE 13.12 A conducting rod is pushed to the right at constant velocity. The resulting change in the magnetic flux induces a current in
the circuit.

From an energy perspective,
produces power
and the resistor dissipates power
moving at constant velocity, the applied force
must balance the magnetic force
carrying the induced current I. Thus the power produced is

. Since the rod is
on the rod when it is
13.6

The power dissipated is
13.7

In satisfying the principle of energy conservation, the produced and dissipated powers are equal.
This principle can be seen in the operation of a rail gun. A rail gun is an electromagnetic projectile launcher that uses
an apparatus similar to Figure 13.12 and is shown in schematic form in Figure 13.13. The conducting rod is replaced
with a projectile or weapon to be fired. So far, we’ve only heard about how motion causes an emf. In a rail gun, the
optimal shutting off/ramping down of a magnetic field decreases the flux in between the rails, causing a current to
flow in the rod (armature) that holds the projectile. This current through the armature experiences a magnetic force
and is propelled forward. Rail guns, however, are not used widely in the military due to the high cost of production
and high currents: Nearly one million amps is required to produce enough energy for a rail gun to be an effective
weapon.

FIGURE 13.13 Current through two rails drives a conductive projectile forward by the magnetic force created.

We can calculate a motionally induced emf with Faraday’s law even when an actual closed circuit is not present.
We simply imagine an enclosed area whose boundary includes the moving conductor, calculate
, and then find
the emf from Faraday’s law. For example, we can let the moving rod of Figure 13.14 be one side of the imaginary

Access for free at openstax.org

13.3 • Motional Emf

rectangular area represented by the dashed lines. The area of the rectangle is lx, so the magnetic flux through it is
Differentiating this equation, we obtain
13.8
which is identical to the potential difference between the ends of the rod that we determined earlier.

FIGURE 13.14 With the imaginary rectangle shown, we can use Faraday’s law to calculate the induced emf in the moving rod.

Motional emfs in Earth’s weak magnetic field are not ordinarily very large, or we would notice voltage along metal
rods, such as a screwdriver, during ordinary motions. For example, a simple calculation of the motional emf of a
1.0-m rod moving at 3.0 m/s perpendicular to the Earth’s field gives

This small value is consistent with experience. There is a spectacular exception, however. In 1992 and 1996,
attempts were made with the space shuttle to create large motional emfs. The tethered satellite was to be let out on
a 20-km length of wire, as shown in Figure 13.15, to create a 5-kV emf by moving at orbital speed through Earth’s
field. This emf could be used to convert some of the shuttle’s kinetic and potential energy into electrical energy if a
complete circuit could be made. To complete the circuit, the stationary ionosphere was to supply a return path
through which current could flow. (The ionosphere is the rarefied and partially ionized atmosphere at orbital
altitudes. It conducts because of the ionization. The ionosphere serves the same function as the stationary rails and
connecting resistor in Figure 13.13, without which there would not be a complete circuit.) Drag on the current in the
cable due to the magnetic force
does the work that reduces the shuttle’s kinetic and potential energy,
and allows it to be converted into electrical energy. Both tests were unsuccessful. In the first, the cable hung up and
could only be extended a couple of hundred meters; in the second, the cable broke when almost fully extended.
Example 13.4 indicates feasibility in principle.

557

558

13 • Electromagnetic Induction

FIGURE 13.15 Motional emf as electrical power conversion for the space shuttle was the motivation for the tethered satellite experiment. A
5-kV emf was predicted to be induced in the 20-km tether while moving at orbital speed in Earth’s magnetic field. The circuit is completed
by a return path through the stationary ionosphere.

EXAMPLE 13.4
Calculating the Large Motional Emf of an Object in Orbit
Calculate the motional emf induced along a 20.0-km conductor moving at an orbital speed of 7.80 km/s
perpendicular to Earth’s
magnetic field.
Strategy
This is a great example of using the equation motional
Solution
Entering the given values into

gives

Significance
The value obtained is greater than the 5-kV measured voltage for the shuttle experiment, since the actual orbital
motion of the tether is not perpendicular to Earth’s field. The 7.80-kV value is the maximum emf obtained when
and so

EXAMPLE 13.5
A Metal Rod Rotating in a Magnetic Field
Part (a) of Figure 13.16 shows a metal rod OS that is rotating in a horizontal plane around point O. The rod slides
along a wire that forms a circular arc PST of radius r. The system is in a constant magnetic field that is directed out
of the page. (a) If you rotate the rod at a constant angular velocity , what is the current I in the closed loop OPSO?
Assume that the resistor R furnishes all of the resistance in the closed loop. (b) Calculate the work per unit time that
you do while rotating the rod and show that it is equal to the power dissipated in the resistor.

Access for free at openstax.org

13.3 • Motional Emf

FIGURE 13.16 (a) The end of a rotating metal rod slides along a circular wire in a horizontal plane. (b) The induced current in the rod. (c)
The magnetic force on an infinitesimal current segment.

Strategy
The magnetic flux is the magnetic field times the area of the quarter circle or
When finding the emf
through Faraday’s law, all variables are constant in time but , with
To calculate the work per unit time,
we know this is related to the torque times the angular velocity. The torque is calculated by knowing the force on a
rod and integrating it over the length of the rod.
Solution
a. From geometry, the area of the loop OPSO is

Differentiating with respect to time and using

Hence, the magnetic flux through the loop is

we have

When divided by the resistance R of the loop, this yields for the magnitude of the induced current

As increases, so does the flux through the loop due to
To counteract this increase, the magnetic field due
to the induced current must be directed into the page in the region enclosed by the loop. Therefore, as part (b)
of Figure 13.16 illustrates, the current circulates clockwise.
b. You rotate the rod by exerting a torque on it. Since the rod rotates at constant angular velocity, this torque is
equal and opposite to the torque exerted on the current in the rod by the original magnetic field. The magnetic
force on the infinitesimal segment of length dx shown in part (c) of Figure 13.16 is
so the
magnetic torque on this segment is
The net magnetic torque on the rod is then

The torque that you exert on the rod is equal and opposite to
and the work that you do when the rod
rotates through an angle
is
Hence, the work per unit time that you do on the rod is

where we have substituted for I. The power dissipated in the resistor is

Therefore, we see that

, which can be written as

559

560

13 • Electromagnetic Induction

Hence, the power dissipated in the resistor is equal to the work per unit time done in rotating the rod.
Significance
An alternative way of looking at the induced emf from Faraday’s law is to integrate in space instead of time. The
solution, however, would be the same. The motional emf is

The velocity can be written as the angular velocity times the radius and the differential length written as dr.
Therefore,

which is the same solution as before.

EXAMPLE 13.6
A Rectangular Coil Rotating in a Magnetic Field
A rectangular coil of area A and N turns is placed in a uniform magnetic field
coil is rotated about the z-axis through its center at a constant angular velocity
induced emf in the coil.

as shown in Figure 13.17. The
Obtain an expression for the

FIGURE 13.17 A rectangular coil rotating in a uniform magnetic field.

Strategy
According to the diagram, the angle between the perpendicular to the surface ( ) and the magnetic field

is .

The dot product of
simplifies to only the
component of the magnetic field, namely where the magnetic
field projects onto the unit area vector . The magnitude of the magnetic field and the area of the loop are fixed over
time, which makes the integration simplify quickly. The induced emf is written out using Faraday’s law.

Access for free at openstax.org

13.3 • Motional Emf

Solution
When the coil is in a position such that its normal vector
flux through a single turn of the coil is

makes an angle

with the magnetic field

the magnetic

From Faraday’s law, the emf induced in the coil is

The constant angular velocity is
The angle represents the time evolution of the angular velocity or .
This is changes the function to time space rather than . The induced emf therefore varies sinusoidally with time
according to

where
Significance
If the magnetic field strength or area of the loop were also changing over time, these variables wouldn’t be able to
be pulled out of the time derivative to simplify the solution as shown. This example is the basis for an electric
generator, as we will give a full discussion in Electric Generators and Back Emf.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 13.4
Shown below is a rod of length l that is rotated counterclockwise around the axis through O by the torque due to
Assuming that the rod is in a uniform magnetic field , what is the emf induced between the ends of the rod when
its angular velocity is ? Which end of the rod is at a higher potential?

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 13.5
A rod of length 10 cm moves at a speed of 10 m/s perpendicularly through a 1.5-T magnetic field. What is the
potential difference between the ends of the rod?

561

562

13 • Electromagnetic Induction

13.4 Induced Electric Fields
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Connect the relationship between an induced emf from Faraday’s law to an electric field, thereby showing
that a changing magnetic flux creates an electric field
• Solve for the electric field based on a changing magnetic flux in time
The fact that emfs are induced in circuits implies that work is being done on the conduction electrons in the wires.
What can possibly be the source of this work? We know that it’s neither a battery nor a magnetic field, for a battery
does not have to be present in a circuit where current is induced, and magnetic fields never do work on moving
charges. The answer is that the source of the work is an electric field
by

that is induced in the wires. The work done

in moving a unit charge completely around a circuit is the induced emf ε; that is,
13.9

where

represents the line integral around the circuit. Faraday’s law can be written in terms of the induced

electric field as
13.10
There is an important distinction between the electric field induced by a changing magnetic field and the
electrostatic field produced by a fixed charge distribution. Specifically, the induced electric field is nonconservative
because it does net work in moving a charge over a closed path, whereas the electrostatic field is conservative and
does no net work over a closed path. Hence, electric potential can be associated with the electrostatic field, but not
with the induced field. The following equations represent the distinction between the two types of electric field:
13.11

Our results can be summarized by combining these equations:
13.12

EXAMPLE 13.7
Induced Electric Field in a Circular Coil
What is the induced electric field in the circular coil of Example 13.2 (and Figure 13.9) at the three times indicated?
Strategy
Using cylindrical symmetry, the electric field integral simplifies into the electric field times the circumference of a
circle. Since we already know the induced emf, we can connect these two expressions by Faraday’s law to solve for
the induced electric field.
Solution
The induced electric field in the coil is constant in magnitude over the cylindrical surface, similar to how Ampere’s
law problems with cylinders are solved. Since

Access for free at openstax.org

is tangent to the coil,

13.4 • Induced Electric Fields

When combined with Equation 13.12, this gives

The direction of

is counterclockwise, and

circulates in the same direction around the coil. The values of E are

Significance
When the magnetic flux through a circuit changes, a nonconservative electric field is induced, which drives current
through the circuit. But what happens if
in free space where there isn’t a conducting path? The answer is
that this case can be treated as if a conducting path were present; that is, nonconservative electric fields are
induced wherever
whether or not there is a conducting path present.
These nonconservative electric fields always satisfy Equation 13.12. For example, if the circular coil of Figure 13.9
were removed, an electric field in free space at
would still be directed counterclockwise, and its
magnitude would still be 1.9 V/m at
, 1.5 V/m at
etc. The existence of induced electric fields
is certainly not restricted to wires in circuits.

EXAMPLE 13.8
Electric Field Induced by the Changing Magnetic Field of a Solenoid
Part (a) of Figure 13.18 shows a long solenoid with radius R and n turns per unit length; its current decreases with
time according to
What is the magnitude of the induced electric field at a point a distance r from the
central axis of the solenoid (a) when
and (b) when
[see part (b) of Figure 13.18]. (c) What is the
direction of the induced field at both locations? Assume that the infinite-solenoid approximation is valid throughout
the regions of interest.

FIGURE 13.18 (a) The current in a long solenoid is decreasing exponentially. (b) A cross-sectional view of the solenoid from its left end. The
cross-section shown is near the middle of the solenoid. An electric field is induced both inside and outside the solenoid.

563

564

13 • Electromagnetic Induction

Strategy
Using the formula for the magnetic field inside an infinite solenoid and Faraday’s law, we calculate the induced emf.
Since we have cylindrical symmetry, the electric field integral reduces to the electric field times the circumference of
the integration path. Then we solve for the electric field.
Solution
a. The magnetic field is confined to the interior of the solenoid where
Thus, the magnetic flux through a circular path whose radius r is greater than R, the solenoid radius, is

The induced field is tangent to this path, and because of the cylindrical symmetry of the system, its
magnitude is constant on the path. Hence, we have

b. For a path of radius r inside the solenoid,

so

and the induced field is

c. The magnetic field points into the page as shown in part (b) and is decreasing. If either of the circular paths
were occupied by conducting rings, the currents induced in them would circulate as shown, in conformity with
Lenz’s law. The induced electric field must be so directed as well.
Significance
In part (b), note that

increases with r inside and decreases as 1/r outside the solenoid, as shown in Figure 13.19.

FIGURE 13.19 The electric field vs. distance r. When
proportional to 1/r.

Access for free at openstax.org

the electric field rises linearly, whereas when

the electric field falls of

13.4 • Induced Electric Fields

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 13.6
Suppose that the coil of Example 13.2 is a square rather than circular. Can Equation 13.12 be used to calculate (a)
the induced emf and (b) the induced electric field?

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 13.7
What is the magnitude of the induced electric field in Example 13.8 at
turns per meter,
and

if

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 13.8
The magnetic field shown below is confined to the cylindrical region shown and is changing with time. Identify those
paths for which

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 13.9
A long solenoid of cross-sectional area
is wound with 25 turns of wire per centimeter. It is placed in the
middle of a closely wrapped coil of 10 turns and radius 25 cm, as shown below. (a) What is the emf induced in the
coil when the current through the solenoid is decreasing at a rate
(b) What is the electric field
induced in the coil?

565

566

13 • Electromagnetic Induction

13.5 Eddy Currents
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain how eddy currents are created in metals
• Describe situations where eddy currents are beneficial and where they are not helpful
As discussed two sections earlier, a motional emf is induced when a conductor moves in a magnetic field or when a
magnetic field moves relative to a conductor. If motional emf can cause a current in the conductor, we refer to that
current as an eddy current.

Magnetic Damping
Eddy currents can produce significant drag, called magnetic damping, on the motion involved. Consider the
apparatus shown in Figure 13.20, which swings a pendulum bob between the poles of a strong magnet. (This is
another favorite physics demonstration.) If the bob is metal, significant drag acts on the bob as it enters and leaves
the field, quickly damping the motion. If, however, the bob is a slotted metal plate, as shown in part (b) of the figure,
the magnet produces a much smaller effect. There is no discernible effect on a bob made of an insulator. Why does
drag occur in both directions, and are there any uses for magnetic drag?

FIGURE 13.20 A common physics demonstration device for exploring eddy currents and magnetic damping. (a) The motion of a metal
pendulum bob swinging between the poles of a magnet is quickly damped by the action of eddy currents. (b) There is little effect on the
motion of a slotted metal bob, implying that eddy currents are made less effective. (c) There is also no magnetic damping on a
nonconducting bob, since the eddy currents are extremely small.

Figure 13.21 shows what happens to the metal plate as it enters and leaves the magnetic field. In both cases, it
experiences a force opposing its motion. As it enters from the left, flux increases, setting up an eddy current
(Faraday’s law) in the counterclockwise direction (Lenz’s law), as shown. Only the right-hand side of the current loop
is in the field, so an unopposed force acts on it to the left (RHR-1). When the metal plate is completely inside the
field, there is no eddy current if the field is uniform, since the flux remains constant in this region. But when the
plate leaves the field on the right, flux decreases, causing an eddy current in the clockwise direction that, again,
experiences a force to the left, further slowing the motion. A similar analysis of what happens when the plate swings
from the right toward the left shows that its motion is also damped when entering and leaving the field.

Access for free at openstax.org

13.5 • Eddy Currents

FIGURE 13.21 A more detailed look at the conducting plate passing between the poles of a magnet. As it enters and leaves the field, the
change in flux produces an eddy current. Magnetic force on the current loop opposes the motion. There is no current and no magnetic drag
when the plate is completely inside the uniform field.

When a slotted metal plate enters the field (Figure 13.22), an emf is induced by the change in flux, but it is less
effective because the slots limit the size of the current loops. Moreover, adjacent loops have currents in opposite
directions, and their effects cancel. When an insulating material is used, the eddy current is extremely small, so
magnetic damping on insulators is negligible. If eddy currents are to be avoided in conductors, then they must be
slotted or constructed of thin layers of conducting material separated by insulating sheets.

FIGURE 13.22 Eddy currents induced in a slotted metal plate entering a magnetic field form small loops, and the forces on them tend to
cancel, thereby making magnetic drag almost zero.

Applications of Magnetic Damping
One use of magnetic damping is found in sensitive laboratory balances. To have maximum sensitivity and accuracy,
the balance must be as friction-free as possible. But if it is friction-free, then it will oscillate for a very long time.
Magnetic damping is a simple and ideal solution. With magnetic damping, drag is proportional to speed and
becomes zero at zero velocity. Thus, the oscillations are quickly damped, after which the damping force disappears,
allowing the balance to be very sensitive (Figure 13.23). In most balances, magnetic damping is accomplished with
a conducting disc that rotates in a fixed field.

567

568

13 • Electromagnetic Induction

FIGURE 13.23 Magnetic damping of this sensitive balance slows its oscillations. Since Faraday’s law of induction gives the greatest effect
for the most rapid change, damping is greatest for large oscillations and goes to zero as the motion stops.

Since eddy currents and magnetic damping occur only in conductors, recycling centers can use magnets to separate
metals from other materials. Trash is dumped in batches down a ramp, beneath which lies a powerful magnet.
Conductors in the trash are slowed by magnetic damping while nonmetals in the trash move on, separating from the
metals (Figure 13.24). This works for all metals, not just ferromagnetic ones. A magnet can separate out the
ferromagnetic materials alone by acting on stationary trash.

FIGURE 13.24 Metals can be separated from other trash by magnetic drag. Eddy currents and magnetic drag are created in the metals sent
down this ramp by the powerful magnet beneath it. Nonmetals move on.

Other major applications of eddy currents appear in metal detectors and braking systems in trains and roller
coasters. Portable metal detectors (Figure 13.25) consist of a primary coil carrying an alternating current and a
secondary coil in which a current is induced. An eddy current is induced in a piece of metal close to the detector,
causing a change in the induced current within the secondary coil. This can trigger some sort of signal, such as a
shrill noise.

Access for free at openstax.org

13.5 • Eddy Currents

FIGURE 13.25 A soldier in Iraq uses a metal detector to search for explosives and weapons. (credit: U.S. Army)

Braking using eddy currents is safer because factors such as rain do not affect the braking and the braking is
smoother. However, eddy currents cannot bring the motion to a complete stop, since the braking force produced
decreases as speed is reduced. Thus, speed can be reduced from say 20 m/s to 5 m/s, but another form of braking
is needed to completely stop the vehicle. Generally, powerful rare-earth magnets such as neodymium magnets are
used in roller coasters. Figure 13.26 shows rows of magnets in such an application. The vehicle has metal fins
(normally containing copper) that pass through the magnetic field, slowing the vehicle down in much the same way
as with the pendulum bob shown in Figure 13.20.

FIGURE 13.26 The rows of rare-earth magnets (protruding horizontally) are used for magnetic braking in roller coasters. (credit: Stefan
Scheer)

Induction cooktops have electromagnets under their surface. The magnetic field is varied rapidly, producing eddy
currents in the base of the pot, causing the pot and its contents to increase in temperature. Induction cooktops have
high efficiencies and good response times when the base of the pot is a conductor, such as iron or steel.

569

570

13 • Electromagnetic Induction

13.6 Electric Generators and Back Emf
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain how an electric generator works
• Determine the induced emf in a loop at any time interval, rotating at a constant rate in a magnetic field
• Show that rotating coils have an induced emf; in motors this is called back emf because it opposes the
emf input to the motor
A variety of important phenomena and devices can be understood with Faraday’s law. In this section, we examine
two of these.

Electric Generators
Electric generators induce an emf by rotating a coil in a magnetic field, as briefly discussed in Motional Emf. We
now explore generators in more detail. Consider the following example.

EXAMPLE 13.9
Calculating the Emf Induced in a Generator Coil
The generator coil shown in Figure 13.27 is rotated through one-fourth of a revolution (from
to
in
15.0 ms. The 200-turn circular coil has a 5.00-cm radius and is in a uniform 0.80-T magnetic field. What is the emf
induced?

FIGURE 13.27 When this generator coil is rotated through one-fourth of a revolution, the magnetic flux
zero, inducing an emf.

Access for free at openstax.org

changes from its maximum to

13.6 • Electric Generators and Back Emf

Strategy
Faraday’s law of induction is used to find the emf induced:

We recognize this situation as the same one in Example 13.6. According to the diagram, the projection of the surface
normal vector to the magnetic field is initially
and this is inserted by the definition of the dot product. The
magnitude of the magnetic field and area of the loop are fixed over time, which makes the integration simplify
quickly. The induced emf is written out using Faraday’s law:

Solution
We are given that

,

, and

The area of the loop is

Entering this value gives

Significance
This is a practical average value, similar to the 120 V used in household power.
The emf calculated in Example 13.9 is the average over one-fourth of a revolution. What is the emf at any given
instant? It varies with the angle between the magnetic field and a perpendicular to the coil. We can get an
expression for emf as a function of time by considering the motional emf on a rotating rectangular coil of width w
and height l in a uniform magnetic field, as illustrated in Figure 13.28.

FIGURE 13.28 A generator with a single rectangular coil rotated at constant angular velocity in a uniform magnetic field produces an emf
that varies sinusoidally in time. Note the generator is similar to a motor, except the shaft is rotated to produce a current rather than the
other way around.

Charges in the wires of the loop experience the magnetic force, because they are moving in a magnetic field.
Charges in the vertical wires experience forces parallel to the wire, causing currents. But those in the top and
bottom segments feel a force perpendicular to the wire, which does not cause a current. We can thus find the
induced emf by considering only the side wires. Motional emf is given to be
, where the velocity v is
perpendicular to the magnetic field B. Here the velocity is at an angle with B, so that its component perpendicular
to B is v sin (see Figure 13.28). Thus, in this case, the emf induced on each side is
, and they are in
the same direction. The total emf around the loop is then
13.13
This expression is valid, but it does not give emf as a function of time. To find the time dependence of emf, we

571

572

13 • Electromagnetic Induction

assume the coil rotates at a constant angular velocity

Now, linear velocity v is related to angular velocity

by

. The angle

is related to angular velocity by

Here,

so that

so that
13.14
and
13.15

Noting that the area of the loop is

and allowing for N loops, we find that
13.16

This is the emf induced in a generator coil of N turns and area A rotating at a constant angular velocity
magnetic field B. This can also be expressed as

in a uniform

where

13.17

13.18

is the peak emf, since the maximum value of
. Note that the frequency of the oscillation is
the period is
Figure 13.29 shows a graph of emf as a function of time, and it now seems
reasonable that ac voltage is sinusoidal.

and

FIGURE 13.29 The emf of a generator is sent to a light bulb with the system of rings and brushes shown. The graph gives the emf of the
generator as a function of time, where
is the peak emf. The period is
where f is the frequency.

The fact that the peak emf is
makes good sense. The greater the number of coils, the larger their area,
and the stronger the field, the greater the output voltage. It is interesting that the faster the generator is spun
(greater ), the greater the emf. This is noticeable on bicycle generators—at least the cheaper varieties.
Figure 13.30 shows a scheme by which a generator can be made to produce pulsed dc. More elaborate
arrangements of multiple coils and split rings can produce smoother dc, although electronic rather than mechanical
means are usually used to make ripple-free dc.

Access for free at openstax.org

13.6 • Electric Generators and Back Emf

FIGURE 13.30 Split rings, called commutators, produce a pulsed dc emf output in this configuration.

In real life, electric generators look a lot different from the figures in this section, but the principles are the same.
The source of mechanical energy that turns the coil can be falling water (hydropower), steam produced by the
burning of fossil fuels, or the kinetic energy of wind. Figure 13.31 shows a cutaway view of a steam turbine; steam
moves over the blades connected to the shaft, which rotates the coil within the generator. The generation of
electrical energy from mechanical energy is the basic principle of all power that is sent through our electrical grids to
our homes.

FIGURE 13.31 Steam turbine/generator. The steam produced by burning coal impacts the turbine blades, turning the shaft, which is
connected to the generator.

Generators illustrated in this section look very much like the motors illustrated previously. This is not coincidental.
In fact, a motor becomes a generator when its shaft rotates. Certain early automobiles used their starter motor as a
generator. In the next section, we further explore the action of a motor as a generator.

Back Emf
Generators convert mechanical energy into electrical energy, whereas motors convert electrical energy into
mechanical energy. Thus, it is not surprising that motors and generators have the same general construction. A

573

574

13 • Electromagnetic Induction

motor works by sending a current through a loop of wire located in a magnetic field. As a result, the magnetic field
exerts torque on the loop. This rotates a shaft, thereby extracting mechanical work out of the electrical current sent
in initially. (Refer to Force and Torque on a Current Loop for a discussion on motors that will help you understand
more about them before proceeding.)
When the coil of a motor is turned, magnetic flux changes through the coil, and an emf (consistent with Faraday’s
law) is induced. The motor thus acts as a generator whenever its coil rotates. This happens whether the shaft is
turned by an external input, like a belt drive, or by the action of the motor itself. That is, when a motor is doing work
and its shaft is turning, an emf is generated. Lenz’s law tells us the emf opposes any change, so that the input emf
that powers the motor is opposed by the motor’s self-generated emf, called the back emf of the motor (Figure
13.32).

FIGURE 13.32 The coil of a dc motor is represented as a resistor in this schematic. The back emf is represented as a variable emf that
opposes the emf driving the motor. Back emf is zero when the motor is not turning and increases proportionally to the motor’s angular
velocity.

The generator output of a motor is the difference between the supply voltage and the back emf. The back emf is zero
when the motor is first turned on, meaning that the coil receives the full driving voltage and the motor draws
maximum current when it is on but not turning. As the motor turns faster, the back emf grows, always opposing the
driving emf, and reduces both the voltage across the coil and the amount of current it draws. This effect is
noticeable in many common situations. When a vacuum cleaner, refrigerator, or washing machine is first turned on,
lights in the same circuit dim briefly due to the IR drop produced in feeder lines by the large current drawn by the
motor.
When a motor first comes on, it draws more current than when it runs at its normal operating speed. When a
mechanical load is placed on the motor, like an electric wheelchair going up a hill, the motor slows, the back emf
drops, more current flows, and more work can be done. If the motor runs at too low a speed, the larger current can
overheat it (via resistive power in the coil,
perhaps even burning it out. On the other hand, if there is no
mechanical load on the motor, it increases its angular velocity until the back emf is nearly equal to the driving emf.
Then the motor uses only enough energy to overcome friction.
Eddy currents in iron cores of motors can cause troublesome energy losses. These are usually minimized by
constructing the cores out of thin, electrically insulated sheets of iron. The magnetic properties of the core are
hardly affected by the lamination of the insulating sheet, while the resistive heating is reduced considerably.
Consider, for example, the motor coils represented in Figure 13.32. The coils have an equivalent resistance of
and are driven by an emf of 48.0 V. Shortly after being turned on, they draw a current

and thus dissipate
of energy as heat transfer. Under normal operating conditions for this
motor, suppose the back emf is 40.0 V. Then at operating speed, the total voltage across the coils is 8.0 V (48.0 V
minus the 40.0 V back emf), and the current drawn is

Under normal load, then, the power dissipated is
This does not cause a
problem for this motor, whereas the former 5.76 kW would burn out the coils if sustained.

Access for free at openstax.org

13.6 • Electric Generators and Back Emf

EXAMPLE 13.10
A Series-Wound Motor in Operation
The total resistance

of a series-wound dc motor is

(Figure 13.33). When connected to a 120-V

source ( ), the motor draws 10 A while running at constant angular velocity. (a) What is the back emf induced in
the rotating coil,
(b) What is the mechanical power output of the motor? (c) How much power is dissipated in the
resistance of the coils? (d) What is the power output of the 120-V source? (e) Suppose the load on the motor
increases, causing it to slow down to the point where it draws 20 A. Answer parts (a) through (d) for this situation.

FIGURE 13.33 Circuit representation of a series-wound direct current motor.

Strategy
The back emf is calculated based on the difference between the supplied voltage and the loss from the current
through the resistance. The power from each device is calculated from one of the power formulas based on the
given information.
Solution
a. The back emf is
b. Since the potential across the armature is 100 V when the current through it is 10 A, the power output of the
motor is
c. A 10-A current flows through coils whose combined resistance is

, so the power dissipated in the coils is

d. Since 10 A is drawn from the 120-V source, its power output is
e. Repeating the same calculations with

, we find

The motor is turning more slowly in this case, so its power output and the power of the source are larger.
Significance
Notice that we have an energy balance in part (d):

575

576

13 • Electromagnetic Induction

13.7 Applications of Electromagnetic Induction
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain how computer hard drives and graphic tablets operate using magnetic induction
• Explain how hybrid/electric vehicles and transcranial magnetic stimulation use magnetic induction to
their advantage
Modern society has numerous applications of Faraday’s law of induction, as we will explore in this chapter and
others. At this juncture, let us mention several that involve recording information using magnetic fields.
Some computer hard drives apply the principle of magnetic induction. Recorded data are made on a coated,
spinning disk. Historically, reading these data was made to work on the principle of induction. However, most input
information today is carried in digital rather than analog form—a series of 0s or 1s are written upon the spinning hard
drive. Therefore, most hard drive readout devices do not work on the principle of induction, but use a technique
known as giant magnetoresistance. Giant magnetoresistance is the effect of a large change of electrical resistance
induced by an applied magnetic field to thin films of alternating ferromagnetic and nonmagnetic layers. This is one
of the first large successes of nanotechnology.
Graphics tablets, or tablet computers where a specially designed pen is used to draw digital images, also applies
induction principles. The tablets discussed here are labeled as passive tablets, since there are other designs that
use either a battery-operated pen or optical signals to write with. The passive tablets are different than the touch
tablets and phones many of us use regularly, but may still be found when signing your signature at a cash register.
Underneath the screen, shown in Figure 13.34, are tiny wires running across the length and width of the screen. The
pen has a tiny magnetic field coming from the tip. As the tip brushes across the screen, a changing magnetic field is
felt in the wires which translates into an induced emf that is converted into the line you just drew.

FIGURE 13.34 A tablet with a specially designed pen to write with is another application of magnetic induction. (credit: Jane Whitney)

Another application of induction is the magnetic stripe on the back of your personal credit card as used at the
grocery store or the ATM. This works on the same principle as the audio or video tape, in which a playback head
reads personal information from your card.

Access for free at openstax.org

13.7 • Applications of Electromagnetic Induction

INTERACTIVE
Check out this video (https://openstax.org/l/21flashmagind) to see how flashlights can use magnetic induction. A
magnet moves by your mechanical work through a wire. The induced current charges a capacitor that stores the
charge that will light the lightbulb even while you are not doing this mechanical work.
Electric and hybrid vehicles also take advantage of electromagnetic induction. One limiting factor that inhibits
widespread acceptance of 100% electric vehicles is that the lifetime of the battery is not as long as the time you get
to drive on a full tank of gas. To increase the amount of charge in the battery during driving, the motor can act as a
generator whenever the car is braking, taking advantage of the back emf produced. This extra emf can be newly
acquired stored energy in the car’s battery, prolonging the life of the battery.
Another contemporary area of research in which electromagnetic induction is being successfully implemented is
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). A host of disorders, including depression and hallucinations, can be traced
to irregular localized electrical activity in the brain. In transcranial magnetic stimulation, a rapidly varying and very
localized magnetic field is placed close to certain sites identified in the brain. The usage of TMS as a diagnostic
technique is well established.

INTERACTIVE
Check out this Youtube video (https://openstax.org/l/21randrelectro) to see how rock-and-roll instruments like
electric guitars use electromagnetic induction to get those strong beats.

577

578

13 • Chapter Review

Chapter Review
Key Terms
back emf emf generated by a running motor, because
it consists of a coil turning in a magnetic field; it
opposes the voltage powering the motor
eddy current current loop in a conductor caused by
motional emf
electric generator device for converting mechanical
work into electric energy; it induces an emf by
rotating a coil in a magnetic field
Faraday’s law induced emf is created in a closed
loop due to a change in magnetic flux through the
loop
induced electric field created based on the changing

magnetic flux with time
induced emf short-lived voltage generated by a
conductor or coil moving in a magnetic field
Lenz’s law direction of an induced emf opposes the
change in magnetic flux that produced it; this is the
negative sign in Faraday’s law
magnetic damping drag produced by eddy currents
magnetic flux measurement of the amount of
magnetic field lines through a given area
motionally induced emf voltage produced by the
movement of a conducting wire in a magnetic field
peak emf maximum emf produced by a generator

Key Equations
Magnetic flux

Faraday’s law
Motionally induced emf
Motional emf around a circuit
Emf produced by an electric generator

Summary
13.1 Faraday’s Law
• The magnetic flux through an enclosed area is
defined as the amount of field lines cutting
through a surface area A defined by the unit area
vector.
• The units for magnetic flux are webers, where
• The induced emf in a closed loop due to a change
in magnetic flux through the loop is known as
Faraday’s law. If there is no change in magnetic
flux, no induced emf is created.
13.2 Lenz's Law
• We can use Lenz’s law to determine the
directions of induced magnetic fields, currents,
and emfs.
• The direction of an induced emf always opposes
the change in magnetic flux that causes the emf,
a result known as Lenz’s law.

Access for free at openstax.org

13.3 Motional Emf
• The relationship between an induced emf in a
wire moving at a constant speed v through a
magnetic field B is given by
• An induced emf from Faraday’s law is created
from a motional emf that opposes the change in
flux.
13.4 Induced Electric Fields
• A changing magnetic flux induces an electric
field.
• Both the changing magnetic flux and the induced
electric field are related to the induced emf from
Faraday’s law.
13.5 Eddy Currents
• Current loops induced in moving conductors are
called eddy currents. They can create significant
drag, called magnetic damping.
• Manipulation of eddy currents has resulted in

