14.6 • RLC Series Circuits

14.43
where i and q are time-dependent functions. This reduces to
14.44

FIGURE 14.17 (a) An RLC circuit. Electromagnetic oscillations begin when the switch is closed. The capacitor is fully charged initially. (b)
Damped oscillations of the capacitor charge are shown in this curve of charge versus time, or q versus t. The capacitor contains a charge
before the switch is closed.

This equation is analogous to

which is the equation of motion for a damped mass-spring system (you first encountered this equation in
Oscillations (http://openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-1/pages/15-introduction)). As we saw in that
chapter, it can be shown that the solution to this differential equation takes three forms, depending on whether the
angular frequency of the undamped spring is greater than, equal to, or less than b/2m. Therefore, the result can be
underdamped
, critically damped
, or overdamped
. By analogy, the
solution q(t) to the RLC differential equation has the same feature. Here we look only at the case of under-damping.
By replacing m by L, b by R, k by 1/C, and x by q in Equation 14.44, and assuming

, we obtain
14.45

where the angular frequency of the oscillations is given by
14.46

This underdamped solution is shown in Figure 14.17(b). Notice that the amplitude of the oscillations decreases as
energy is dissipated in the resistor. Equation 14.45 can be confirmed experimentally by measuring the voltage
across the capacitor as a function of time. This voltage, multiplied by the capacitance of the capacitor, then gives
q(t).

INTERACTIVE
In the interactive circuit construction kit simulation below, you can add inductors and capacitors to work with any
combination of R, L, and C circuits with both dc and ac sources. Then you can measure and evaluate current and
voltage, and graph them as a function of time.

611

612

14 • Inductance

Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-2/pages/14-6-rlc-seriescircuits)

INTERACTIVE
With the interactive DC circuit construction kit simulation below, you can add inductors and capacitors to work with
any combination of R, L, and C circuits with both dc and ac sources. Then you can measure and evaluate current and
voltage, and graph them as a function of time.
Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-2/pages/14-6-rlc-seriescircuits)

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 14.11
In an RLC circuit,
(a) Is the circuit underdamped, critically damped, or
overdamped? (b) If the circuit starts oscillating with a charge of
on the capacitor, how much energy
has been dissipated in the resistor by the time the oscillations cease?

Access for free at openstax.org

14 • Chapter Review

613

Chapter Review
Key Terms
henry (H) unit of inductance,
; it is also
expressed as a volt second per ampere
inductance property of a device that tells how
effectively it induces an emf in another device
inductive time constant denoted by , the
characteristic time given by quantity L/R of a
particular series RL circuit
inductor part of an electrical circuit to provide selfinductance, which is symbolized by a coil of wire
LC circuit circuit composed of an ac source, inductor,

and capacitor
magnetic energy density energy stored per volume
in a magnetic field
mutual inductance geometric quantity that
expresses how effective two devices are at inducing
emfs in one another
RLC circuit circuit with an ac source, resistor,
inductor, and capacitor all in series.
self-inductance effect of the device inducing emf in
itself

Key Equations
Mutual inductance by flux
Mutual inductance in circuits
Self-inductance in terms of magnetic flux
Self-inductance in terms of emf
Self-inductance of a solenoid
Self-inductance of a toroid
Energy stored in an inductor
Current as a function of time for a RL circuit
Time constant for a RL circuit
Charge oscillation in LC circuits
Angular frequency in LC circuits
Current oscillations in LC circuits
Charge as a function of time in RLC circuit
Angular frequency in RLC circuit

Summary
14.1 Mutual Inductance
• Inductance is the property of a device that
expresses how effectively it induces an emf in
another device.
• Mutual inductance is the effect of two devices
inducing emfs in each other.
• A change in current
in one circuit induces
an emf
in the second:

where M is defined to be the mutual inductance
between the two circuits and the minus sign is
due to Lenz’s law.
• Symmetrically, a change in current
through the second circuit induces an emf
in

the first:

where M is the same mutual inductance as in the
reverse process.
14.2 Self-Inductance and Inductors
• Current changes in a device induce an emf in the
device itself, called self-inductance,

where L is the self-inductance of the inductor
and
is the rate of change of current through
it. The minus sign indicates that emf opposes the
change in current, as required by Lenz’s law. The

614

14 • Chapter Review

unit of self-inductance and inductance is the
henry (H), where
.
• The self-inductance of a solenoid is

where N is its number of turns in the solenoid, A
is its cross-sectional area, l is its length, and
is the permeability of
free space.
• The self-inductance of a toroid is

where N is its number of turns in the toroid,
are the inner and outer radii of the
toroid, h is the height of the toroid, and
is the permeability of
free space.
14.3 Energy in a Magnetic Field
• The energy stored in an inductor U is

• The self-inductance per unit length of coaxial
cable is

14.4 RL Circuits
• When a series connection of a resistor and an
inductor—an RL circuit—is connected to a voltage
source, the time variation of the current is
(turning

on),
where the initial current is
• The characteristic time constant is
where L is the inductance and R is the resistance.
• In the first time constant the current rises from
zero to
and to 0.632 of the remainder in
every subsequent time interval
• When the inductor is shorted through a resistor,
current decreases as
(turning off).
Current falls to
in the first time interval
, and to 0.368 of the remainder toward zero in
each subsequent time
14.5 Oscillations in an LC Circuit
• The energy transferred in an oscillatory manner
between the capacitor and inductor in an LC
circuit occurs at an angular frequency
.
• The charge and current in the circuit are given by

14.6 RLC Series Circuits
• The underdamped solution for the capacitor
charge in an RLC circuit is
• The angular frequency given in the underdamped
solution for the RLC circuit is

Conceptual Questions
14.1 Mutual Inductance
1. Show that
and
which are
both expressions for self-inductance, have the
same units.
2. A 10-H inductor carries a current of 20 A.
Describe how a 50-V emf can be induced across
it.
3. The ignition circuit of an automobile is powered
by a 12-V battery. How are we able to generate
large voltages with this power source?
4. When the current through a large inductor is
interrupted with a switch, an arc appears across
the open terminals of the switch. Explain.

Access for free at openstax.org

14.2 Self-Inductance and Inductors
5. Does self-inductance depend on the value of the
magnetic flux? Does it depend on the current
through the wire? Correlate your answers with
the equation
6. Would the self-inductance of a 1.0 m long,
tightly wound solenoid differ from the selfinductance per meter of an infinite, but
otherwise identical, solenoid?
7. Discuss how you might determine the selfinductance per unit length of a long, straight
wire.
8. The self-inductance of a coil is zero if there is no
current passing through the windings. True or
false?

14 • Chapter Review

9. How does the self-inductance per unit length
near the center of a solenoid (away from the
ends) compare with its value near the end of the
solenoid?

615

shown below vary with time after switch S is
closed.

14.3 Energy in a Magnetic Field
10. Show that

has units of energy.

14.4 RL Circuits
11. Use Lenz’s law to explain why the initial current
in the RL circuit of Figure 14.12(b) is zero.
12. When the current in the RL circuit of Figure
14.12(b) reaches its final value
what is the
voltage across the inductor? Across the resistor?
13. Does the time required for the current in an RL
circuit to reach any fraction of its steady-state
value depend on the emf of the battery?
14. An inductor is connected across the terminals of
a battery. Does the current that eventually flows
through the inductor depend on the internal
resistance of the battery? Does the time
required for the current to reach its final value
depend on this resistance?
15. At what time is the voltage across the inductor of
the RL circuit of Figure 14.12(b) a maximum?
16. In the simple RL circuit of Figure 14.12(b), can
the emf induced across the inductor ever be
greater than the emf of the battery used to
produce the current?
17. If the emf of the battery of Figure 14.12(b) is
reduced by a factor of 2, by how much does the
steady-state energy stored in the magnetic field
of the inductor change?
18. A steady current flows through a circuit with a
large inductive time constant. When a switch in
the circuit is opened, a large spark occurs across
the terminals of the switch. Explain.
19. Describe how the currents through

20. Discuss possible practical applications of RL
circuits.
14.5 Oscillations in an LC Circuit
21. Do Kirchhoff’s rules apply to circuits that contain
inductors and capacitors?
22. Can a circuit element have both capacitance and
inductance?
23. In an LC circuit, what determines the frequency
and the amplitude of the energy oscillations in
either the inductor or capacitor?
14.6 RLC Series Circuits
24. When a wire is connected between the two ends
of a solenoid, the resulting circuit can oscillate
like an RLC circuit. Describe what causes the
capacitance in this circuit.
25. Describe what effect the resistance of the
connecting wires has on an oscillating LC circuit.
26. Suppose you wanted to design an LC circuit with
a frequency of 0.01 Hz. What problems might
you encounter?
27. A radio receiver uses an RLC circuit to pick out
particular frequencies to listen to in your house
or car without hearing other unwanted
frequencies. How would someone design such a
circuit?

Problems
14.1 Mutual Inductance
28. When the current in one coil changes at a rate of
5.6 A/s, an emf of
is induced in a
second, nearby coil. What is the mutual
inductance of the two coils?
29. An emf of
is induced in a coil
while the current in a nearby coil is decreasing at
a rate of 2.7 A/s. What is the mutual inductance

of the two coils?
30. Two coils close to each other have a mutual
inductance of 32 mH. If the current in one coil
decays according to
, where
and
what is the
emf induced in the second coil immediately after
the current starts to decay? At

616

14 • Chapter Review

31. A coil of 40 turns is wrapped around a long
solenoid of cross-sectional area
The solenoid is 0.50 m long
and has 500 turns. (a) What is the mutual
inductance of this system? (b) The outer coil is
replaced by a coil of 40 turns whose radius is
three times that of the solenoid. What is the
mutual inductance of this configuration?
32. A 600-turn solenoid is 0.55 m long and 4.2 cm in
diameter. Inside the solenoid, a small
single-turn rectangular coil
is fixed in place with its face perpendicular to
the long axis of the solenoid. What is the mutual
inductance of this system?
33. A toroidal coil has a mean radius of 16 cm and a
cross-sectional area of
; it is wound
uniformly with 1000 turns. A second toroidal coil
of 750 turns is wound uniformly over the first
coil. Ignoring the variation of the magnetic field
within a toroid, determine the mutual
inductance of the two coils.

2.00-mH inductor be switched on or off to
induce a 500-V emf?
39. A coil with a self-inductance of 2.0 H carries a
current that varies with time according to
Find an expression for
the emf induced in the coil.
40. A solenoid 50 cm long is wound with 500 turns
of wire. The cross-sectional area of the coil is
What is the self-inductance of the
solenoid?
41. A coil with a self-inductance of 3.0 H carries a
current that decreases at a uniform rate
. What is the emf induced in
the coil? Describe the polarity of the induced
emf.
42. The current I(t) through a 5.0-mH inductor
varies with time, as shown below. The resistance
of the inductor is
Calculate the voltage
across the inductor at
.

34. A solenoid of
turns has length and radius
and a second smaller solenoid of
turns
has length and radius
. The smaller
solenoid is placed completely inside the larger
solenoid so that their long axes coincide. What is
the mutual inductance of the two solenoids?
14.2 Self-Inductance and Inductors
35. An emf of 0.40 V is induced across a coil when
the current through it changes uniformly from
0.10 to 0.60 A in 0.30 s. What is the selfinductance of the coil?
36. The current shown in part (a) below is increasing,
whereas that shown in part (b) is decreasing. In
each case, determine which end of the inductor is at
the higher potential.

37. What is the rate at which the current though a
0.30-H coil is changing if an emf of 0.12 V is
induced across the coil?
38. When a camera uses a flash, a fully charged
capacitor discharges through an inductor. In
what time must the 0.100-A current through a

Access for free at openstax.org

43. A long, cylindrical solenoid with 100 turns per
centimeter has a radius of 1.5 cm. (a) Neglecting
end effects, what is the self-inductance per unit
length of the solenoid? (b) If the current through
the solenoid changes at the rate 5.0 A/s, what is
the emf induced per unit length?
44. Suppose that a rectangular toroid has 2000
windings and a self-inductance of 0.040 H. If
, what is the ratio of its outer radius to its
inner radius?

45. What is the self-inductance per meter of a
coaxial cable whose inner radius is 0.50 mm and
whose outer radius is 4.00 mm?

voltages across L and
.

14 • Chapter Review

617

at

.

14.3 Energy in a Magnetic Field
46. At the instant a current of 0.20 A is flowing
through a coil of wire, the energy stored in its
magnetic field is
What is the selfinductance of the coil?
47. Suppose that a rectangular toroid has 2000
windings and a self-inductance of 0.040 H. If
, what is the current flowing through
a rectangular toroid when the energy in its
magnetic field is

54. The current in the RL circuit shown here increases to
of its steady-state value in 2.0 s. What is the
time constant of the circuit?

48. Solenoid A is tightly wound while solenoid B has
windings that are evenly spaced with a gap
equal to the diameter of the wire. The solenoids
are otherwise identical. Determine the ratio of
the energies stored per unit length of these
solenoids when the same current flows through
each.
49. A 10-H inductor carries a current of 20 A. How
much ice at
could be melted by the energy
stored in the magnetic field of the inductor?
(Hint: Use the value
for ice.)
50. A coil with a self-inductance of 3.0 H and a
resistance of
carries a steady current of
2.0 A. (a) What is the energy stored in the
magnetic field of the coil? (b) What is the energy
per second dissipated in the resistance of the
coil?
51. A current of 1.2 A is flowing in a coaxial cable
whose outer radius is five times its inner radius.
What is the magnetic field energy stored in a
3.0-m length of the cable?
14.4 RL Circuits
52. In Figure 14.12,
,
, and
. Determine (a) the time constant of
the circuit, (b) the initial current through the
resistor, (c) the final current through the resistor,
(d) the current through the resistor when
and (e) the voltages across the
inductor and the resistor when
53. For the circuit shown below,
,
and
. After steady state is reached with
closed and
open,
is closed and
immediately thereafter
is opened.
Determine (a) the current through L at
, (b) the
current through L at
, and (c) the

55. How long after switch
is thrown does it take
the current in the circuit shown to reach half its
maximum value? Express your answer in terms
of the time constant of the circuit.

56. Examine the circuit shown below in part (a).
Determine dI/dt at the instant after the switch is
thrown in the circuit of (a), thereby producing the
circuit of (b). Show that if I were to continue to

618

14 • Chapter Review

increase at this initial rate, it would reach its
maximum
in one time constant.

57. The current in the RL circuit shown below
reaches half its maximum value in 1.75 ms after
the switch
is thrown. Determine (a) the time
constant of the circuit and (b) the resistance of
the circuit if
.

60. For the circuit shown below, find the current through
the inductor
after the switch is
reopened.

61. Show that for the circuit shown below, the initial
energy stored in the inductor,
, is equal to
the total energy eventually dissipated in the resistor,

∞

.

58. Consider the circuit shown below. Find
when (a) the switch S is first closed,
(b) after the currents have reached steady-state
values, and (c) at the instant the switch is reopened
(after being closed for a long time).

59. For the circuit shown below,
,
,
, and
. Find the
values of
(a) immediately after switch S is
closed, (b) a long time after S is closed, (c)
immediately after S is reopened, and (d) a long time
after S is reopened.

14.5 Oscillations in an LC Circuit
62. A 5000-pF capacitor is charged to 100 V and
then quickly connected to an 80-mH inductor.
Determine (a) the maximum energy stored in the
magnetic field of the inductor, (b) the peak value
of the current, and (c) the frequency of
oscillation of the circuit.
63. The self-inductance and capacitance of an LC
circuit are 0.20 mH and 5.0 pF. What is the
angular frequency at which the circuit oscillates?

Access for free at openstax.org

14 • Chapter Review

619

64. What is the self-inductance of an LC circuit that
oscillates at 60 Hz when the capacitance is
?
65. In an oscillating LC circuit, the maximum charge
on the capacitor is
and the
maximum current through the inductor is 8.0
mA. (a) What is the period of the oscillations? (b)
How much time elapses between an instant
when the capacitor is uncharged and the next
instant when it is fully charged?
66. The self-inductance and capacitance of an
oscillating LC circuit are
respectively. (a)
What is the frequency of the oscillations? (b) If
the maximum potential difference between the
plates of the capacitor is 50 V, what is the
maximum current in the circuit?
67. In an oscillating LC circuit, the maximum charge
on the capacitor is
. Determine the charge on
the capacitor and the current through the
inductor when energy is shared equally between
the electric and magnetic fields. Express your
answer in terms of
, L, and C.
68. In the circuit shown below,
is opened and
is closed simultaneously. Determine (a) the
frequency of the resulting oscillations, (b) the
maximum charge on the capacitor, (c) the
maximum current through the inductor, and (d)
the electromagnetic energy of the oscillating
circuit.

69. An LC circuit in an AM tuner (in a car stereo) uses
a coil with an inductance of 2.5 mH and a
variable capacitor. If the natural frequency of the
circuit is to be adjustable over the range 540 to
1600 kHz (the AM broadcast band), what range
of capacitance is required?
14.6 RLC Series Circuits
70. In an oscillating RLC circuit,
What is the angular frequency of the
oscillations?
71. In an oscillating RLC circuit with
how
much time elapses before the amplitude of the
oscillations drops to half its initial value?
72. What resistance R must be connected in series
with a 200-mH inductor and a
capacitor of
the resulting RLC oscillating circuit is to decay to
of its initial value of charge in 50 cycles? To
of its initial value in 50 cycles?

Additional Problems
73. Show that the self-inductance per unit length of
an infinite, straight, thin wire is infinite.
74. Two long, parallel wires carry equal currents in
opposite directions. The radius of each wire is a,
and the distance between the centers of the
wires is d. Show that if the magnetic flux within
the wires themselves can be ignored, the selfinductance of a length l of such a pair of wires is
(Hint: Calculate the magnetic flux through a
rectangle of length l between the wires and then
use
.)
75. A small, rectangular single loop of wire with
dimensions l, and a is placed, as shown below, in
the plane of a much larger, rectangular single

loop of wire. The two short sides of the larger
loop are so far from the smaller loop that their
magnetic fields over the smaller fields over the
smaller loop can be ignored. What is the mutual
inductance of the two loops?

620

14 • Chapter Review

76. Suppose that a cylindrical solenoid is wrapped
around a core of iron whose magnetic
susceptibility is x. Using Equation 14.9, show
that the self-inductance of the solenoid is given
by

79. The switch S of the circuit shown below is closed at
. Determine (a) the initial current through the
battery and (b) the steady-state current through the
battery.

where l is its length, A its cross-sectional area,
and N its total number of turns.
77. A solenoid with
turns/m has an iron core
placed in it whose magnetic susceptibility is
. (a) If a current of 2.0 A flows
through the solenoid, what is the magnetic field
in the iron core? (b) What is the effective surface
current formed by the aligned atomic current
loops in the iron core? (c) What is the selfinductance of the filled solenoid?
78. A rectangular toroid with inner radius
outer radius
, height
, and
turns is filled with an
iron core of magnetic susceptibility
.
(a) What is the self-inductance of the toroid? (b)
If the current through the toroid is 2.0 A, what is
the magnetic field at the center of the core? (c)
For this same 2.0-A current, what is the effective
surface current formed by the aligned atomic
current loops in the iron core?

80. In an oscillating RLC circuit,
.
Initially, the capacitor has a charge of
and the current is zero. Calculate the charge on
the capacitor (a) five cycles later and (b) 50
cycles later.
81. A 25.0-H inductor has 100 A of current turned
off in 1.00 ms. (a) What voltage is induced to
oppose this? (b) What is unreasonable about this
result? (c) Which assumption or premise is
responsible?

Challenge Problems
82. A coaxial cable has an inner conductor of radius
a, and outer thin cylindrical shell of radius b. A
current I flows in the inner conductor and
returns in the outer conductor. The selfinductance of the structure will depend on how
the current in the inner cylinder tends to be
distributed. Investigate the following two
extreme cases. (a) Let current in the inner
conductor be distributed only on the surface and
find the self-inductance. (b) Let current in the
inner cylinder be distributed uniformly over its
cross-section and find the self-inductance.
Compare with your results in (a).
83. In a damped oscillating circuit the energy is
dissipated in the resistor. The Q-factor is a
measure of the persistence of the oscillator
against the dissipative loss. (a) Prove that for a
lightly damped circuit the energy, U, in the circuit
decreases according to the following equation.
where
(b) Using the definition of the Q-factor as energy
divided by the loss over the next cycle, prove
that Q-factor of a lightly damped oscillator as

Access for free at openstax.org

defined in this problem is

(Hint: For (b), to obtain Q, divide E at the
beginning of one cycle by the change
over
the next cycle.)
84. The switch in the circuit shown below is closed
at
. Find currents through (a)
, (b)
,
and (c) the battery as function of time.

85. A square loop of side 2 cm is placed 1 cm from a
long wire carrying a current that varies with time
at a constant rate of 3 A/s as shown below. (a)

14 • Chapter Review

Use Ampère’s law and find the magnetic field.
(b) Determine the magnetic flux through the
loop. (c) If the loop has a resistance of
, how
much induced current flows in the loop?

621

622

14 • Chapter Review

Access for free at openstax.org

CHAPTER 15

Alternating-Current Circuits

FIGURE 15.1 The current we draw into our houses is an alternating current (ac). Power lines transmit ac to our neighborhoods, where
local power stations and transformers distribute it to our homes. In this chapter, we discuss how a transformer works and how it allows us
to transmit power at very high voltages and minimal heating losses across the lines.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
15.1 AC Sources
15.2 Simple AC Circuits
15.3 RLC Series Circuits with AC
15.4 Power in an AC Circuit
15.5 Resonance in an AC Circuit
15.6 Transformers
INTRODUCTION Electric power is delivered to our homes by alternating current (ac) through high-voltage
transmission lines. As explained in Transformers, transformers can then change the amplitude of the alternating
potential difference to a more useful form. This lets us transmit power at very high voltages, minimizing resistive
heating losses in the lines, and then furnish that power to homes at lower, safer voltages. Because constant
potential differences are unaffected by transformers, this capability is more difficult to achieve with direct-current
transmission.
In this chapter, we use Kirchhoff’s laws to analyze four simple circuits in which ac flows. We have discussed the use
of the resistor, capacitor, and inductor in circuits with batteries. These components are also part of ac circuits.
However, because ac is required, the constant source of emf supplied by a battery is replaced by an ac voltage
source, which produces an oscillating emf.

624

15 • Alternating-Current Circuits

15.1 AC Sources
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the differences between direct current (dc) and alternating current (ac)
• Define characteristic features of alternating current and voltage, such as the amplitude or peak and the
frequency
Most examples dealt with so far in this book, particularly those using batteries, have constant-voltage sources. Thus,
once the current is established, it is constant. Direct current (dc) is the flow of electric charge in only one direction.
It is the steady state of a constant-voltage circuit.
Most well-known applications, however, use a time-varying voltage source. Alternating current (ac) is the flow of
electric charge that periodically reverses direction. An ac is produced by an alternating emf, which is generated in a
power plant, as described in Induced Electric Fields. If the ac source varies periodically, particularly sinusoidally, the
circuit is known as an ac circuit. Examples include the commercial and residential power that serves so many of our
needs.
The ac voltages and frequencies commonly used in businesses and homes vary around the world. In a typical house,
the potential difference between the two sides of an electrical outlet alternates sinusoidally with a frequency of 60
or 50 Hz and an amplitude of 170 or 311 V, depending on whether you live in the United States or Europe,
respectively. Most people know the potential difference for electrical outlets is 120 V or 220 V in the US or Europe,
but as explained later in the chapter, these voltages are not the peak values given here but rather are related to the
common voltages we see in our electrical outlets. Figure 15.2 shows graphs of voltage and current versus time for
typical dc and ac power in the United States.

FIGURE 15.2 (a) The dc voltage and current are constant in time, once the current is established. (b) The voltage and current versus time
are quite different for ac power. In this example, which shows 60-Hz ac power and time t in milliseconds, voltage and current are sinusoidal
and are in phase for a simple resistance circuit. The frequencies and peak voltages of ac sources differ greatly.

Suppose we hook up a resistor to an ac voltage source and determine how the voltage and current vary in time
across the resistor. Figure 15.3 shows a schematic of a simple circuit with an ac voltage source. The voltage
fluctuates sinusoidally with time at a fixed frequency, as shown, on either the battery terminals or the resistor.
Therefore, the ac voltage, or the “voltage at a plug,” can be given by
15.1
where v is the voltage at time t,
is the peak voltage, and
typical house in the United States,
and
For this simple resistance circuit,
time at a fixed frequency, is

is the angular frequency in radians per second. For a
, whereas in Europe,
and

, so the ac current, meaning the current that fluctuates sinusoidally with
15.2

where i is the current at time t and
is the peak current and is equal to
. For this example, the voltage and
current are said to be in phase, meaning that their sinusoidal functional forms have peaks, troughs, and nodes in the

Access for free at openstax.org

15.2 • Simple AC Circuits

same place. They oscillate in sync with each other, as shown in Figure 15.2(b). In these equations, and throughout
this chapter, we use lowercase letters (such as i) to indicate instantaneous values and capital letters (such as I) to
indicate maximum, or peak, values.

FIGURE 15.3 The potential difference V between the terminals of an ac voltage source fluctuates, so the source and the resistor have ac
sine waves on top of each other. The mathematical expression for v is given by

Current in the resistor alternates back and forth just like the driving voltage, since
. If the resistor is a
fluorescent light bulb, for example, it brightens and dims 120 times per second as the current repeatedly goes
through zero. A 120-Hz flicker is too rapid for your eyes to detect, but if you wave your hand back and forth between
your face and a fluorescent light, you will see the stroboscopic effect of ac.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 15.1
If a European ac voltage source is considered, what is the time difference between the zero crossings on an ac
voltage-versus-time graph?

15.2 Simple AC Circuits
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Interpret phasor diagrams and apply them to ac circuits with resistors, capacitors, and inductors
• Define the reactance for a resistor, capacitor, and inductor to help understand how current in the circuit
behaves compared to each of these devices
In this section, we study simple models of ac voltage sources connected to three circuit components: (1) a resistor,
(2) a capacitor, and (3) an inductor. The power furnished by an ac voltage source has an emf given by

as shown in Figure 15.4. This sine function assumes we start recording the voltage when it is
at a time of
A phase constant may be involved that shifts the function when we start measuring voltages, similar to the
phase constant in the waves we studied in Waves (http://openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-1/pages/
16-introduction). However, because we are free to choose when we start examining the voltage, we can ignore this
phase constant for now. We can measure this voltage across the circuit components using one of two methods: (1) a
quantitative approach based on our knowledge of circuits, or (2) a graphical approach that is explained in the
coming sections.

625

626

15 • Alternating-Current Circuits

FIGURE 15.4 (a) The output

of an ac generator. (b) Symbol used to represent an ac voltage source in a circuit diagram.

Resistor
First, consider a resistor connected across an ac voltage source. From Kirchhoff’s loop rule, the instantaneous
voltage across the resistor of Figure 15.5(a) is

and the instantaneous current through the resistor is

FIGURE 15.5 (a) A resistor connected across an ac voltage source. (b) The current
the resistor. The two quantities are in phase.

through the resistor and the voltage

across

Here,
is the amplitude of the time-varying current. Plots of
and
are shown in Figure 15.5(b).
Both curves reach their maxima and minima at the same times, that is, the current through and the voltage across
the resistor are in phase.
Graphical representations of the phase relationships between current and voltage are often useful in the analysis of
ac circuits. Such representations are called phasor diagrams. The phasor diagram for
is shown in Figure
15.6(a), with the current on the vertical axis. The arrow (or phasor) is rotating counterclockwise at a constant
angular frequency
so we are viewing it at one instant in time. If the length of the arrow corresponds to the current

Access for free at openstax.org

15.2 • Simple AC Circuits

amplitude
the projection of the rotating arrow onto the vertical axis is
instantaneous current.

which is the

FIGURE 15.6 (a) The phasor diagram representing the current through the resistor of Figure 15.5. (b) The phasor diagram representing both
and
.

The vertical axis on a phasor diagram could be either the voltage or the current, depending on the phasor that is
being examined. In addition, several quantities can be depicted on the same phasor diagram. For example, both the
current
and the voltage
are shown in the diagram of Figure 15.6(b). Since they have the same frequency
and are in phase, their phasors point in the same direction and rotate together. The relative lengths of the two
phasors are arbitrary because they represent different quantities; however, the ratio of the lengths of the two
phasors can be represented by the resistance, since one is a voltage phasor and the other is a current phasor.

Capacitor
Now let’s consider a capacitor connected across an ac voltage source. From Kirchhoff’s loop rule, the instantaneous
voltage across the capacitor of Figure 15.7(a) is

Recall that the charge in a capacitor is given by
This is true at any time measured in the ac cycle of
voltage. Consequently, the instantaneous charge on the capacitor is

Since the current in the circuit is the rate at which charge enters (or leaves) the capacitor,

where
is the current amplitude. Using the trigonometric relationship
express the instantaneous current as

Dividing

by

we may

, we obtain an equation that looks similar to Ohm’s law:
15.3

The quantity
is analogous to resistance in a dc circuit in the sense that both quantities are a ratio of a voltage to
a current. As a result, they have the same unit, the ohm. Keep in mind, however, that a capacitor stores and
discharges electric energy, whereas a resistor dissipates it. The quantity
is known as the capacitive reactance
of the capacitor, or the opposition of a capacitor to a change in current. It depends inversely on the frequency of the
ac source—high frequency leads to low capacitive reactance.

627

628

15 • Alternating-Current Circuits

FIGURE 15.7 (a) A capacitor connected across an ac generator. (b) The current
the capacitor. Notice that
leads
by
rad.

through the capacitor and the voltage

across

A comparison of the expressions for
and
shows that there is a phase difference of
between
them. When these two quantities are plotted together, the current peaks a quarter cycle (or
) ahead of the
voltage, as illustrated in Figure 15.7(b). The current through a capacitor leads the voltage across a capacitor by
or a quarter of a cycle.
The corresponding phasor diagram is shown in Figure 15.8. Here, the relationship between
and
is
represented by having their phasors rotate at the same angular frequency, with the current phasor leading by

FIGURE 15.8 The phasor diagram for the capacitor of Figure 15.7. The current phasor leads the voltage phasor by
rotate with the same angular frequency.

rad as they both

To this point, we have exclusively been using peak values of the current or voltage in our discussion, namely,
and
However, if we average out the values of current or voltage, these values are zero. Therefore, we often use a
second convention called the root mean square value, or rms value, in discussions of current and voltage. The rms
operates in reverse of the terminology. First, you square the function, next, you take the mean, and then, you find
the square root. As a result, the rms values of current and voltage are not zero. Appliances and devices are
commonly quoted with rms values for their operations, rather than peak values. We indicate rms values with a
subscript attached to a capital letter (such as
).
Although a capacitor is basically an open circuit, an rms current, or the root mean square of the current, appears in
a circuit with an ac voltage applied to a capacitor. Consider that
15.4

where

is the peak current in an ac system. The rms voltage, or the root mean square of the voltage, is
15.5

Access for free at openstax.org

15.2 • Simple AC Circuits

where
is the peak voltage in an ac system. The rms current appears because the voltage is continually reversing,
charging, and discharging the capacitor. If the frequency goes to zero, which would be a dc voltage,
tends to
infinity, and the current is zero once the capacitor is charged. At very high frequencies, the capacitor’s reactance
tends to zero—it has a negligible reactance and does not impede the current (it acts like a simple wire).

Inductor
Lastly, let’s consider an inductor connected to an ac voltage source. From Kirchhoff’s loop rule, the voltage across
the inductor L of Figure 15.9(a) is
15.6
The emf across an inductor is equal to
however, the potential difference across the inductor is
, because if we consider that the voltage around the loop must equal zero, the voltage gained
from the ac source must dissipate through the inductor. Therefore, connecting this with the ac voltage source, we
have

FIGURE 15.9 (a) An inductor connected across an ac generator. (b) The current
inductor. Here
lags
by
rad.

through the inductor and the voltage

across the

The current
is found by integrating this equation. Since the circuit does not contain a source of constant emf,
there is no steady current in the circuit. Hence, we can set the constant of integration, which represents the steady
current in the circuit, equal to zero, and we have
15.7
where

The relationship between

and

may also be written in a form analogous to Ohm’s law:
15.8

The quantity
is known as the inductive reactance of the inductor, or the opposition of an inductor to a change in
current; its unit is also the ohm. Note that
varies directly as the frequency of the ac source—high frequency
causes high inductive reactance.
A phase difference of
rad occurs between the current through and the voltage across the inductor. From
Equation 15.6 and Equation 15.7, the current through an inductor lags the potential difference across an inductor by
, or a quarter of a cycle. The phasor diagram for this case is shown in Figure 15.10.

629

630

15 • Alternating-Current Circuits

FIGURE 15.10 The phasor diagram for the inductor of Figure 15.9. The current phasor lags the voltage phasor by
rotate with the same angular frequency.

rad as they both

INTERACTIVE
An animation from the University of New South Wales AC Circuits (https://openstax.org/l/21accircuits) illustrates
some of the concepts we discuss in this chapter. They also include wave and phasor diagrams that evolve over time
so that you can get a better picture of how each changes over time.

EXAMPLE 15.1
Simple AC Circuits
An ac generator produces an emf of amplitude 10 V at a frequency
Determine the voltages across and
the currents through the circuit elements when the generator is connected to (a) a
resistor, (b) a
capacitor, and (c) a 15-mH inductor.
Strategy
The entire AC voltage across each device is the same as the source voltage. We can find the currents by finding the
reactance X of each device and solving for the peak current using
Solution
The voltage across the terminals of the source is

is the angular frequency. Since v(t) is also the voltage across each of the elements,

where
we have

a. When

the amplitude of the current through the resistor is

so

Access for free at openstax.org

15.3 • RLC Series Circuits with AC

b. From Equation 15.3, the capacitive reactance is

so the maximum value of the current is

and the instantaneous current is given by

c. From Equation 15.8, the inductive reactance is

The maximum current is therefore

and the instantaneous current is

Significance
Although the voltage across each device is the same, the peak current has different values, depending on the
reactance. The reactance for each device depends on the values of resistance, capacitance, or inductance.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 15.2
Repeat Example 15.1 for an ac source of amplitude 20 V and frequency 100 Hz.

15.3 RLC Series Circuits with AC
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe how the current varies in a resistor, a capacitor, and an inductor while in series with an ac power
source
• Use phasors to understand the phase angle of a resistor, capacitor, and inductor ac circuit and to
understand what that phase angle means
• Calculate the impedance of a circuit
The ac circuit shown in Figure 15.11, called an RLC series circuit, is a series combination of a resistor, capacitor, and
inductor connected across an ac source. It produces an emf of

631

632

15 • Alternating-Current Circuits

FIGURE 15.11 (a) An RLC series circuit. (b) A comparison of the generator output voltage and the current. The value of the phase difference
depends on the values of R, C, and L.

Since the elements are in series, the same current flows through each element at all points in time. The relative
phase between the current and the emf is not obvious when all three elements are present. Consequently, we
represent the current by the general expression

where
is the current amplitude and is the phase angle between the current and the applied voltage. The phase
angle is thus the amount by which the voltage and current are out of phase with each other in a circuit. Our task is to
find
A phasor diagram involving
is helpful for analyzing the circuit. As shown in Figure
15.12, the phasor representing
points in the same direction as the phasor for
its amplitude is
The
phasor lags the i(t) phasor by
rad and has the amplitude
The phasor for
leads the
i(t) phasor by
rad and has the amplitude

FIGURE 15.12 The phasor diagram for the RLC series circuit of Figure 15.11.

At any instant, the voltage across the RLC combination is
the emf of the source. Since
a component of a sum of vectors is the sum of the components of the individual vectors—for example,
—the projection of the vector sum of phasors onto the vertical axis is the sum of the vertical
projections of the individual phasors. Hence, if we add vectorially the phasors representing
and then find the projection of the resultant onto the vertical axis, we obtain

Access for free at openstax.org

15.3 • RLC Series Circuits with AC

The vector sum of the phasors is shown in Figure 15.13. The resultant phasor has an amplitude
and is directed at
an angle with respect to the
or
, phasor. The projection of this resultant phasor onto the vertical axis is
We can easily determine the unknown quantities
and from the geometry of the phasor
diagram. For the phase angle,

and after cancellation of

this becomes
15.9

Furthermore, from the Pythagorean theorem,

FIGURE 15.13 The resultant of the phasors for
shown) is aligned with the
phasor.

,

, and

is equal to the phasor for

The i(t) phasor (not

The current amplitude is therefore the ac version of Ohm’s law:
15.10

where
15.11

is known as the impedance of the circuit. Its unit is the ohm, and it is the ac analog to resistance in a dc circuit,
which measures the combined effect of resistance, capacitive reactance, and inductive reactance (Figure 15.14).

633

634

15 • Alternating-Current Circuits

FIGURE 15.14 Power capacitors are used to balance the impedance of the effective inductance in transmission lines.

The RLC circuit is analogous to the wheel of a car driven over a corrugated road (Figure 15.15). The regularly spaced
bumps in the road drive the wheel up and down; in the same way, a voltage source increases and decreases. The
shock absorber acts like the resistance of the RLC circuit, damping and limiting the amplitude of the oscillation.
Energy within the wheel system goes back and forth between kinetic and potential energy stored in the car spring,
analogous to the shift between a maximum current, with energy stored in an inductor, and no current, with energy
stored in the electric field of a capacitor. The amplitude of the wheel’s motion is at a maximum if the bumps in the
road are hit at the resonant frequency, which we describe in more detail in Resonance in an AC Circuit.

FIGURE 15.15 On a car, the shock absorber damps motion and dissipates energy. This is much like the resistance in an RLC circuit. The
mass and spring determine the resonant frequency.

PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
AC Circuits
To analyze an ac circuit containing resistors, capacitors, and inductors, it is helpful to think of each device’s
reactance and find the equivalent reactance using the rules we used for equivalent resistance in the past. Phasors

Access for free at openstax.org

15.3 • RLC Series Circuits with AC

are a great method to determine whether the emf of the circuit has positive or negative phase (namely, leads or lags
other values). A mnemonic device of “ELI the ICE man” is sometimes used to remember that the emf (E) leads the
current (I) in an inductor (L) and the current (I) leads the emf (E) in a capacitor (C).
Use the following steps to determine the emf of the circuit by phasors:
1. Draw the phasors for voltage across each device: resistor, capacitor, and inductor, including the phase angle in
the circuit.
2. If there is both a capacitor and an inductor, find the net voltage from these two phasors, since they are
antiparallel.
3. Find the equivalent phasor from the phasor in step 2 and the resistor’s phasor using trigonometry or
components of the phasors. The equivalent phasor found is the emf of the circuit.

EXAMPLE 15.2
An RLC Series Circuit
The output of an ac generator connected to an RLC series combination has a frequency of 200 Hz and an amplitude
of 0.100 V. If
and
what are (a) the capacitive reactance, (b)
the inductive reactance, (c) the impedance, (d) the current amplitude, and (e) the phase difference between the
current and the emf of the generator?
Strategy
The reactances and impedance in (a)–(c) are found by substitutions into Equation 15.3, Equation 15.8, and Equation
15.11, respectively. The current amplitude is calculated from the peak voltage and the impedance. The phase
difference between the current and the emf is calculated by the inverse tangent of the difference between the
reactances divided by the resistance.
Solution
a. From Equation 15.3, the capacitive reactance is

b. From Equation 15.8, the inductive reactance is

c. Substituting the values of R,

, and

into Equation 15.11, we obtain for the impedance

d. The current amplitude is

e. From Equation 15.9, the phase difference between the current and the emf is

Significance
The phase angle is positive because the reactance of the inductor is larger than the reactance of the capacitor.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 15.3
Find the voltages across the resistor, the capacitor, and the inductor in the circuit of Figure 15.11 using
as the output of the ac generator.

635

636

15 • Alternating-Current Circuits

15.4 Power in an AC Circuit
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe how average power from an ac circuit can be written in terms of peak current and voltage and of
rms current and voltage
• Determine the relationship between the phase angle of the current and voltage and the average power,
known as the power factor
A circuit element dissipates or produces power according to
where I is the current through the element
and V is the voltage across it. Since the current and the voltage both depend on time in an ac circuit, the
instantaneous power
is also time dependent. A plot of p(t) for various circuit elements is shown in
Figure 15.16. For a resistor, i(t) and v(t) are in phase and therefore always have the same sign (see Figure 15.5). For
a capacitor or inductor, the relative signs of i(t) and v(t) vary over a cycle due to their phase differences (see Figure
15.7 and Figure 15.9). Consequently, p(t) is positive at some times and negative at others, indicating that capacitive
and inductive elements produce power at some instants and absorb it at others.

Access for free at openstax.org

15.4 • Power in an AC Circuit

FIGURE 15.16 Graph of instantaneous power for various circuit elements. (a) For the resistor,
whereas for (b) the capacitor
and (c) the inductor,
(d) For the source,
which may be positive, negative, or zero, depending on

Because instantaneous power varies in both magnitude and sign over a cycle, it seldom has any practical
importance. What we’re almost always concerned with is the power averaged over time, which we refer to as the
average power. It is defined by the time average of the instantaneous power over one cycle:

where
is the period of the oscillations. With the substitutions
this integral becomes

and

637

638

15 • Alternating-Current Circuits

Using the trigonometric relation

we obtain

Evaluation of these two integrals yields

and

Hence, the average power associated with a circuit element is given by
15.12

In engineering applications,
is known as the power factor, which is the amount by which the power delivered
in the circuit is less than the theoretical maximum of the circuit due to voltage and current being out of phase. For a
resistor,
so the average power dissipated is

A comparison of p(t) and
we use the rms values

is shown in Figure 15.16(d). To make
look like its dc counterpart,
of the current and the voltage. By definition, these are

where

With

we obtain

We may then write for the average power dissipated by a resistor,
15.13

This equation further emphasizes why the rms value is chosen in discussion rather than peak values. Both equations
for average power are correct for Equation 15.13, but the rms values in the formula give a cleaner representation, so
the extra factor of 1/2 is not necessary.
Alternating voltages and currents are usually described in terms of their rms values. For example, the 110 V from a
household outlet is an rms value. The amplitude of this source is
Because most ac meters are
calibrated in terms of rms values, a typical ac voltmeter placed across a household outlet will read 110 V.
For a capacitor and an inductor,
respectively. Since
Equation 15.12 that the average power dissipated by either of these elements is

Access for free at openstax.org

we find from
Capacitors and inductors

15.4 • Power in an AC Circuit

absorb energy from the circuit during one half-cycle and then discharge it back to the circuit during the other halfcycle. This behavior is illustrated in the plots of Figure 15.16, (b) and (c), which show p(t) oscillating sinusoidally
about zero.
The phase angle for an ac generator may have any value. If
the generator produces power; if
it absorbs power. In terms of rms values, the average power of an ac generator is written as

For the generator in an RLC circuit,

and

Hence the average power of the generator is
15.14
This can also be written as

which designates that the power produced by the generator is dissipated in the resistor. As we can see, Ohm’s law
for the rms ac is found by dividing the rms voltage by the impedance.

EXAMPLE 15.3
Power Output of a Generator
An ac generator whose emf is given by

is connected to an RLC circuit for which
,
, and
. (a) What is the
rms voltage across the generator? (b) What is the impedance of the circuit? (c) What is the average power output of
the generator?
Strategy
The rms voltage is the amplitude of the voltage times
. The impedance of the circuit involves the resistance
and the reactances of the capacitor and the inductor. The average power is calculated by Equation 15.14, or more
specifically, the last part of the equation, because we have the impedance of the circuit Z, the rms voltage
, and
the resistance R.
Solution
a. Since

the rms voltage across the generator is

b. The impedance of the circuit is

639

640

15 • Alternating-Current Circuits

c. From Equation 15.14, the average power transferred to the circuit is

Significance
If the resistance is much larger than the reactance of the capacitor or inductor, the average power is a dc circuit
equation of
where V replaces the rms voltage.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 15.4
An ac voltmeter attached across the terminals of a 45-Hz ac generator reads 7.07 V. Write an expression for the emf
of the generator.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 15.5
Show that the rms voltages across a resistor, a capacitor, and an inductor in an ac circuit where the rms current is
are given by
respectively. Determine these values for the components of the
RLC circuit of Equation 15.12.

15.5 Resonance in an AC Circuit
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Determine the peak ac resonant angular frequency for a RLC circuit
• Explain the width of the average power versus angular frequency curve and its significance using terms
like bandwidth and quality factor
In the RLC series circuit of Figure 15.11, the current amplitude is, from Equation 15.10,
15.15
If we can vary the frequency of the ac generator while keeping the amplitude of its output voltage constant, then the
current changes accordingly. A plot of
versus is shown in Figure 15.17.

Access for free at openstax.org

15.5 • Resonance in an AC Circuit

FIGURE 15.17 At an RLC circuit’s resonant frequency,

the current amplitude is at its maximum value.

In Oscillations (http://openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-1/pages/15-introduction), we encountered a
similar graph where the amplitude of a damped harmonic oscillator was plotted against the angular frequency of a
sinusoidal driving force (see Forced Oscillations (http://openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-1/pages/
15-6-forced-oscillations)). This similarity is more than just a coincidence, as shown earlier by the application of
Kirchhoff’s loop rule to the circuit of Figure 15.11. This yields
15.16
or

where we substituted dq(t)/dt for i(t). A comparison of Equation 15.16 and, from Oscillations (http://openstax.org/
books/university-physics-volume-1/pages/15-introduction), Damped Oscillations (http://openstax.org/books/
university-physics-volume-1/pages/15-5-damped-oscillations) for damped harmonic motion clearly demonstrates
that the driven RLC series circuit is the electrical analog of the driven damped harmonic oscillator.
The resonant frequency
of the RLC circuit is the frequency at which the amplitude of the current is a maximum
and the circuit would oscillate if not driven by a voltage source. By inspection, this corresponds to the angular
frequency
at which the impedance Z in Equation 15.15 is a minimum, or when

and
15.17

This is the resonant angular frequency of the circuit. Substituting
Equation 15.11, we find that at resonance,

into Equation 15.9, Equation 15.10, and

Therefore, at resonance, an RLC circuit is purely resistive, with the applied emf and current in phase.
What happens to the power at resonance? Equation 15.14 tells us how the average power transferred from an ac
generator to the RLC combination varies with frequency. In addition,
reaches a maximum when Z, which
depends on the frequency, is a minimum, that is, when
Thus, at resonance, the average
power output of the source in an RLC series circuit is a maximum. From Equation 15.14, this maximum is
Figure 15.18 is a typical plot of
versus in the region of maximum power output. The bandwidth
of the
resonance peak is defined as the range of angular frequencies over which the average power
is greater than

641

642

15 • Alternating-Current Circuits

one-half the maximum value of
The sharpness of the peak is described by a dimensionless quantity known as
the quality factor Q of the circuit. By definition,
15.18

where
is the resonant angular frequency. A high Q indicates a sharp resonance peak. We can give Q in terms of
the circuit parameters as
15.19

FIGURE 15.18 Like the current, the average power transferred from an ac generator to an RLC circuit peaks at the resonant frequency.

Resonant circuits are commonly used to pass or reject selected frequency ranges. This is done by adjusting the
value of one of the elements and hence “tuning” the circuit to a particular resonant frequency. For example, in
radios, the receiver is tuned to the desired station by adjusting the resonant frequency of its circuitry to match the
frequency of the station. If the tuning circuit has a high Q, it will have a small bandwidth, so signals from other
stations at frequencies even slightly different from the resonant frequency encounter a high impedance and are not
passed by the circuit. Cell phones work in a similar fashion, communicating with signals of around 1 GHz that are
tuned by an inductor-capacitor circuit. One of the most common applications of capacitors is their use in ac-timing
circuits, based on attaining a resonant frequency. A metal detector also uses a shift in resonance frequency in
detecting metals (Figure 15.19).

Access for free at openstax.org

15.5 • Resonance in an AC Circuit

FIGURE 15.19 When a metal detector comes near a piece of metal, the self-inductance of one of its coils changes. This causes a shift in the
resonant frequency of a circuit containing the coil. That shift is detected by the circuitry and transmitted to the diver by means of the
headphones. (credit: modification of work by Eric Lippmann, U.S. Navy)

EXAMPLE 15.4
Resonance in an RLC Series Circuit
(a) What is the resonant frequency of a circuit using the voltage and LRC values all wired in series from Example
15.2? (b) If the ac generator is set to this frequency without changing the amplitude of the output voltage, what is
the amplitude of the current?
Strategy
The resonant frequency for a RLC circuit is calculated from Equation 15.17, which comes from a balance between
the reactances of the capacitor and the inductor. Since the circuit is at resonance, the impedance is equal to the
resistor. Then, the peak current is calculated by the voltage divided by the resistance.
Solution
a. The resonant frequency is found from Equation 15.17:

b. At resonance, the impedance of the circuit is purely resistive, and the current amplitude is

Significance
If the circuit were not set to the resonant frequency, we would need the impedance of the entire circuit to calculate
the current.

643

644

15 • Alternating-Current Circuits

EXAMPLE 15.5
Power Transfer in an RLC Series Circuit at Resonance
(a) What is the resonant angular frequency of an RLC circuit with
and
(b) If an ac source of constant amplitude 4.00 V is set to this frequency, what is the average
power transferred to the circuit? (c) Determine Q and the bandwidth of this circuit.
Strategy
The resonant angular frequency is calculated from Equation 15.17. The average power is calculated from the rms
voltage and the resistance in the circuit. The quality factor is calculated from Equation 15.19 and by knowing the
resonant frequency. The bandwidth is calculated from Equation 15.18 and by knowing the quality factor.
Solution
a. The resonant angular frequency is

b. At this frequency, the average power transferred to the circuit is a maximum. It is

c. The quality factor of the circuit is

We then find for the bandwidth

Significance
If a narrower bandwidth is desired, a lower resistance or higher inductance would help. However, a lower resistance
increases the power transferred to the circuit, which may not be desirable, depending on the maximum power that
could possibly be transferred.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 15.6
In the circuit of Figure 15.11,
and
(a) What is the resonant
frequency? (b) What is the impedance of the circuit at resonance? (c) If the voltage amplitude is 10 V, what is i(t) at
resonance? (d) The frequency of the AC generator is now changed to 200 Hz. Calculate the phase difference
between the current and the emf of the generator.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 15.7
What happens to the resonant frequency of an RLC series circuit when the following quantities are increased by a
factor of 4: (a) the capacitance, (b) the self-inductance, and (c) the resistance?

Access for free at openstax.org

