10 • Chapter Review

no current is flowing. The internal resistance r of
a voltage source affects the output voltage when
a current flows.
• The voltage output of a device is called its
terminal voltage
and is given by
, where I is the electric current
and is positive when flowing away from the
positive terminal of the voltage source and r is
the internal resistance.
10.2 Resistors in Series and Parallel
• The equivalent resistance of an electrical circuit
with resistors wired in a series is the sum of the
individual resistances:
.
• Each resistor in a series circuit has the same
amount of current flowing through it.
• The potential drop, or power dissipation, across
each individual resistor in a series is different,
and their combined total is the power source
input.
• The equivalent resistance of an electrical circuit
with resistors wired in parallel is less than the
lowest resistance of any of the components and
can be determined using the formula

• Each resistor in a parallel circuit has the same
full voltage of the source applied to it.
• The current flowing through each resistor in a
parallel circuit is different, depending on the
resistance.
• If a more complex connection of resistors is a
combination of series and parallel, it can be
reduced to a single equivalent resistance by
identifying its various parts as series or parallel,
reducing each to its equivalent, and continuing
until a single resistance is eventually reached.
10.3 Kirchhoff's Rules
• Kirchhoff’s rules can be used to analyze any
circuit, simple or complex. The simpler series
and parallel connection rules are special cases of
Kirchhoff’s rules.
• Kirchhoff’s first rule, also known as the junction
rule, applies to the charge to a junction. Current
is the flow of charge; thus, whatever charge flows
into the junction must flow out.
• Kirchhoff’s second rule, also known as the loop
rule, states that the voltage drop around a loop is

451

zero.
• When calculating potential and current using
Kirchhoff’s rules, a set of conventions must be
followed for determining the correct signs of
various terms.
• When multiple voltage sources are in series, their
internal resistances add together and their emfs
add together to get the total values.
• When multiple voltage sources are in parallel,
their internal resistances combine to an
equivalent resistance that is less than the
individual resistance and provides a higher
current than a single cell.
• Solar cells can be wired in series or parallel to
provide increased voltage or current,
respectively.
10.4 Electrical Measuring Instruments
• Voltmeters measure voltage, and ammeters
measure current. Analog meters are based on
the combination of a resistor and a galvanometer,
a device that gives an analog reading of current
or voltage. Digital meters are based on analogto-digital converters and provide a discrete or
digital measurement of the current or voltage.
• A voltmeter is placed in parallel with the voltage
source to receive full voltage and must have a
large resistance to limit its effect on the circuit.
• An ammeter is placed in series to get the full
current flowing through a branch and must have
a small resistance to limit its effect on the circuit.
• Standard voltmeters and ammeters alter the
circuit they are connected to and are thus limited
in accuracy.
• Ohmmeters are used to measure resistance. The
component in which the resistance is to be
measured should be isolated (removed) from the
circuit.
10.5 RC Circuits
• An RC circuit is one that has both a resistor and a
capacitor.
• The time constant for an RC circuit is
• When an initially uncharged
capacitor in series with a resistor is charged by a
dc voltage source, the capacitor asymptotically
approaches the maximum charge.
• As the charge on the capacitor increases, the
current exponentially decreases from the initial
current:
• If a capacitor with an initial charge Q is
discharged through a resistor starting at
,
then its charge decreases exponentially. The

452

10 • Chapter Review

current flows in the opposite direction, compared
to when it charges, and the magnitude of the
charge decreases with time.
10.6 Household Wiring and Electrical Safety
• The two types of electric hazards are thermal
(excessive power) and shock (current through a
person). Electrical safety systems and devices
are employed to prevent thermal and shock
hazards.
• Shock severity is determined by current, path,

duration, and ac frequency.
• Circuit breakers and fuses interrupt excessive
currents to prevent thermal hazards.
• The three-wire system guards against thermal
and shock hazards, utilizing live/hot, neutral, and
ground wires, and grounding the neutral wire and
case of the appliance.
• A ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) prevents
shock by detecting the loss of current to
unintentional paths.

Conceptual Questions
10.1 Electromotive Force
1. What effect will the internal resistance of a
rechargeable battery have on the energy being
used to recharge the battery?
2. A battery with an internal resistance of r and an
emf of 10.00 V is connected to a load resistor
. As the battery ages, the internal
resistance triples. How much is the current
through the load resistor reduced?
3. Show that the power dissipated by the load
resistor is maximum when the resistance of the
load resistor is equal to the internal resistance of
the battery.

9. Consider the circuit shown below. Does the
analysis of the circuit require Kirchhoff’s method,
or can it be redrawn to simplify the circuit? If it is
a circuit of series and parallel connections, what
is the equivalent resistance?

10.2 Resistors in Series and Parallel
4. A voltage occurs across an open switch. What is
the power dissipated by the open switch?
5. The severity of a shock depends on the
magnitude of the current through your body.
Would you prefer to be in series or in parallel
with a resistance, such as the heating element of
a toaster, if you were shocked by it? Explain.
6. Suppose you are doing a physics lab that asks
you to put a resistor into a circuit, but all the
resistors supplied have a larger resistance than
the requested value. How would you connect the
available resistances to attempt to get the
smaller value asked for?
7. Some light bulbs have three power settings (not
including zero), obtained from multiple filaments
that are individually switched and wired in
parallel. What is the minimum number of
filaments needed for three power settings?
10.3 Kirchhoff's Rules
8. Can all of the currents going into the junction
shown below be positive? Explain.

Access for free at openstax.org

10. Do batteries in a circuit always supply power to a
circuit, or can they absorb power in a circuit?
Give an example.
11. What are the advantages and disadvantages of
connecting batteries in series? In parallel?
12. Semi-tractor trucks use four large 12-V
batteries. The starter system requires 24 V,
while normal operation of the truck’s other
electrical components utilizes 12 V. How could
the four batteries be connected to produce 24
V? To produce 12 V? Why is 24 V better than 12
V for starting the truck’s engine (a very heavy
load)?

10 • Chapter Review

10.4 Electrical Measuring Instruments
13. What would happen if you placed a voltmeter in
series with a component to be tested?
14. What is the basic operation of an ohmmeter as it
measures a resistor?
15. Why should you not connect an ammeter
directly across a voltage source as shown
below?

453

10.5 RC Circuits
16. A battery, switch, capacitor, and lamp are
connected in series. Describe what happens to
the lamp when the switch is closed.
17. When making an ECG measurement, it is
important to measure voltage variations over
small time intervals. The time is limited by the
RC constant of the circuit—it is not possible to
measure time variations shorter than RC. How
would you manipulate R and C in the circuit to
allow the necessary measurements?
10.6 Household Wiring and Electrical Safety
18. Why isn’t a short circuit necessarily a shock
hazard?
19. We are often advised to not flick electric
switches with wet hands, dry your hand first. We
are also advised to never throw water on an
electric fire. Why?

Problems
10.1 Electromotive Force
20. A car battery with a 12-V emf and an internal
resistance of
is being charged with a
current of 60 A. Note that in this process, the
battery is being charged. (a) What is the
potential difference across its terminals? (b) At
what rate is thermal energy being dissipated in
the battery? (c) At what rate is electric energy
being converted into chemical energy?
21. The label on a battery-powered radio
recommends the use of a rechargeable nickelcadmium cell (nicads), although it has a 1.25-V
emf, whereas an alkaline cell has a 1.58-V emf.
The radio has a
resistance. (a) Draw a
circuit diagram of the radio and its battery. Now,
calculate the power delivered to the radio (b)
when using a nicad cells, each having an internal
resistance of
, and (c) when using an
alkaline cell, having an internal resistance of
. (d) Does this difference seem
significant, considering that the radio’s effective
resistance is lowered when its volume is turned
up?
22. An automobile starter motor has an equivalent
resistance of
and is supplied by a
12.0-V battery with a
internal
resistance. (a) What is the current to the motor?
(b) What voltage is applied to it? (c) What power

is supplied to the motor? (d) Repeat these
calculations for when the battery connections
are corroded and add
to the circuit.
(Significant problems are caused by even small
amounts of unwanted resistance in low-voltage,
high-current applications.)
23. (a) What is the internal resistance of a voltage
source if its terminal potential drops by 2.00 V
when the current supplied increases by 5.00 A?
(b) Can the emf of the voltage source be found
with the information supplied?
24. A person with body resistance between their
hands of
accidentally grasps the
terminals of a 20.0-kV power supply. (Do NOT do
this!) (a) Draw a circuit diagram to represent the
situation. (b) If the internal resistance of the
power supply is
, what is the current
through their body? (c) What is the power
dissipated in their body? (d) If the power supply
is to be made safe by increasing its internal
resistance, what should the internal resistance
be for the maximum current in this situation to
be 1.00 mA or less? (e) Will this modification
compromise the effectiveness of the power
supply for driving low-resistance devices?
Explain your reasoning.
25. A 12.0-V emf automobile battery has a terminal
voltage of 16.0 V when being charged by a

454

10 • Chapter Review

current of 10.0 A. (a) What is the battery’s
internal resistance? (b) What power is dissipated
inside the battery? (c) At what rate (in
)
will its temperature increase if its mass is 20.0
kg and it has a specific heat of
, assuming no heat escapes?
10.2 Resistors in Series and Parallel
26. (a) What is the resistance of a
,a
, and a
resistor connected in
series? (b) In parallel?
27. What are the largest and smallest resistances
you can obtain by connecting a
,a
, and a
resistor together?
28. An 1800-W toaster, a 1400-W speaker, and a
75-W lamp are plugged into the same outlet in a
15-A fuse and 120-V circuit. (The three devices
are in parallel when plugged into the same
socket.) (a) What current is drawn by each
device? (b) Will this combination blow the 15-A
fuse?
29. Your car’s 30.0-W headlight and 2.40-kW starter
are ordinarily connected in parallel in a 12.0-V
system. What power would one headlight and
the starter consume if connected in series to a
12.0-V battery? (Neglect any other resistance in
the circuit and any change in resistance in the
two devices.)
30. (a) Given a 48.0-V battery and
and
resistors, find the current and power for
each when connected in series. (b) Repeat when
the resistances are in parallel.

dissipate if a total of 15.0 A passes through the
wires when the motor comes on? Assume
negligible change in bulb resistance. (b) What
power is consumed by the motor?
34. Show that if two resistors
and
are
combined and one is much greater than the
other
, (a) their series resistance is
very nearly equal to the greater resistance
and (b) their parallel resistance is very nearly
equal to the smaller resistance
.
35. Consider the circuit shown below. The terminal
voltage of the battery is
(a) Find
the equivalent resistance of the circuit. (b) Find
the current through each resistor. (c) Find the
potential drop across each resistor. (d) Find the
power dissipated by each resistor. (e) Find the
power supplied by the battery.

10.3 Kirchhoff's Rules
36. Consider the circuit shown below. (a) Find the
voltage across each resistor. (b)What is the
power supplied to the circuit and the power
dissipated or consumed by the circuit?

31. Referring to the example combining series and
parallel circuits and Figure 10.16, calculate
in
the following two different ways: (a) from the
known values of and ; (b) using Ohm’s law
for
. In both parts, explicitly show how you
follow the steps in the Series and Parallel
Resistors.
32. Referring to Figure 10.16, (a) Calculate
and
note how it compares with
found in the first
two example problems in this module. (b) Find
the total power supplied by the source and
compare it with the sum of the powers
dissipated by the resistors.
33. Refer to Figure 10.17 and the discussion of
lights dimming when a heavy appliance comes
on. (a) Given the voltage source is 120 V, the
wire resistance is
and the bulb is
nominally 75.0 W, what power will the bulb

Access for free at openstax.org

37. Consider the circuits shown below. (a) What is
the current through each resistor in part (a)? (b)
What is the current through each resistor in part
(b)? (c) What is the power dissipated or
consumed by each circuit? (d) What is the power

10 • Chapter Review

455

supplied to each circuit?

41. Consider the circuit shown below. (a) Find
(b) Find the power supplied
by the voltage sources. (c) Find the power dissipated
by the resistors.

38. Consider the circuit shown below. Find

42. Consider the circuit shown below. Write the three
loop equations for the loops shown.

39. Consider the circuit shown below. Find

43. Consider the circuit shown below. Write equations
for the three currents in terms of R and V.

40. Consider the circuit shown below. Find

44. Consider the circuit shown in the preceding
problem. Write equations for the power supplied
by the voltage sources and the power dissipated
by the resistors in terms of R and V.

456

10 • Chapter Review

45. A child’s electronic toy is supplied by three
1.58-V alkaline cells having internal resistances
of
in series with a 1.53-V carbon-zinc
dry cell having a
internal resistance.
The load resistance is
. (a) Draw a circuit
diagram of the toy and its batteries. (b) What
current flows? (c) How much power is supplied
to the load? (d) What is the internal resistance of
the dry cell if it goes bad, resulting in only 0.500
W being supplied to the load?
46. Apply the junction rule to Junction b shown below.
Is any new information gained by applying the
junction rule at e?

10.5 RC Circuits
49. The timing device in an automobile’s
intermittent wiper system is based on an RC
time constant and utilizes a
capacitor
and a variable resistor. Over what range must R
be made to vary to achieve time constants from
2.00 to 15.0 s?
50. A heart pacemaker fires 72 times a minute, each
time a 25.0-nF capacitor is charged (by a battery
in series with a resistor) to 0.632 of its full
voltage. What is the value of the resistance?

47. Apply the loop rule to Loop afedcba in the
preceding problem.
10.4 Electrical Measuring Instruments
48. Suppose you measure the terminal voltage of a
1.585-V alkaline cell having an internal
resistance of
by placing a
voltmeter across its terminals (see below). (a)
What current flows? (b) Find the terminal
voltage. (c) To see how close the measured
terminal voltage is to the emf, calculate their
ratio.

51. The duration of a photographic flash is related to
an RC time constant, which is
for a
certain camera. (a) If the resistance of the flash
lamp is
during discharge, what is the
size of the capacitor supplying its energy? (b)
What is the time constant for charging the
capacitor, if the charging resistance is
?
52. A 2.00- and a
capacitor can be
connected in series or parallel, as can a 25.0and a
resistor. Calculate the four RC
time constants possible from connecting the
resulting capacitance and resistance in series.
53. A
resistor, an uncharged
capacitor, and a 6.16-V emf are connected in
series. (a) What is the initial current? (b) What is
the RC time constant? (c) What is the current
after one time constant? (d) What is the voltage
on the capacitor after one time constant?
54. A heart defibrillator being used on a patient has
an RC time constant of 10.0 ms due to the
resistance of the patient and the capacitance of
the defibrillator. (a) If the defibrillator has a
capacitance of
what is the resistance of
the path through the patient? (You may neglect
the capacitance of the patient and the resistance
of the defibrillator.) (b) If the initial voltage is
12.0 kV, how long does it take to decline to

Access for free at openstax.org

10 • Chapter Review

?
55. An ECG monitor must have an RC time constant
less than
to be able to measure
variations in voltage over small time intervals.
(a) If the resistance of the circuit (due mostly to
that of the patient’s chest) is
, what is
the maximum capacitance of the circuit? (b)
Would it be difficult in practice to limit the
capacitance to less than the value found in (a)?
56. Using the exact exponential treatment,
determine how much time is required to charge
an initially uncharged 100-pF capacitor through
a
resistor to
of its final voltage.
57. If you wish to take a picture of a bullet traveling
at 500 m/s, then a very brief flash of light
produced by an RC discharge through a flash
tube can limit blurring. Assuming 1.00 mm of
motion during one RC constant is acceptable,
and given that the flash is driven by a
capacitor, what is the resistance in the flash
tube?
10.6 Household Wiring and Electrical Safety
58. (a) How much power is dissipated in a short
circuit of 240-V ac through a resistance of
? (b) What current flows?
59. What voltage is involved in a 1.44-kW short
circuit through a
resistance?
60. Find the current through a person and identify
the likely effect on her if she touches a 120-V ac
source: (a) if she is standing on a rubber mat and
offers a total resistance of
; (b) if she is
standing barefoot on wet grass and has a
resistance of only
.
61. While taking a bath, a person touches the metal
case of a radio. The path through the person to

457

the drainpipe and ground has a resistance of
. What is the smallest voltage on the
case of the radio that could cause ventricular
fibrillation?
62. A man foolishly tries to fish a burning piece of
bread from a toaster with a metal butter knife
and comes into contact with 120-V ac. He does
not even feel it since, luckily, he is wearing
rubber-soled shoes. What is the minimum
resistance of the path the current follows
through the person?
63. (a) During surgery, a current as small as
applied directly to the heart may cause
ventricular fibrillation. If the resistance of the
exposed heart is
what is the smallest
voltage that poses this danger? (b) Does your
answer imply that special electrical safety
precautions are needed?
64. (a) What is the resistance of a 220-V ac short
circuit that generates a peak power of 96.8 kW?
(b) What would the average power be if the
voltage were 120 V ac?
65. A heart defibrillator passes 10.0 A through a
patient’s torso for 5.00 ms in an attempt to
restore normal beating. (a) How much charge
passed? (b) What voltage was applied if 500 J of
energy was dissipated? (c) What was the path’s
resistance? (d) Find the temperature increase
caused in the 8.00 kg of affected tissue.
66. A short circuit in a 120-V appliance cord has a
resistance. Calculate the temperature
rise of the 2.00 g of surrounding materials,
assuming their specific heat capacity is
and that it takes 0.0500 s for a
circuit breaker to interrupt the current. Is this
likely to be damaging?

Additional Problems
67. A circuit contains a D cell battery, a switch, a
resistor, and four 20-mF capacitors
connected in series. (a) What is the equivalent
capacitance of the circuit? (b) What is the RC
time constant? (c) How long before the current
decreases to
of the initial value once the
switch is closed?
68. A circuit contains a D-cell battery, a switch, a
resistor, and three 20-mF capacitors. The
capacitors are connected in parallel, and the
parallel connection of capacitors are connected

in series with the switch, the resistor and the
battery. (a) What is the equivalent capacitance of
the circuit? (b) What is the RC time constant? (c)
How long before the current decreases to
of the initial value once the switch is closed?
69. Consider the circuit below. The battery has an emf of
and an internal resistance of
(a) Find the equivalent resistance of the
circuit and the current out of the battery. (b) Find the
current through each resistor. (c) Find the potential
drop across each resistor. (d) Find the power

458

10 • Chapter Review

dissipated by each resistor. (e) Find the total power
supplied by the batteries.

70. A homemade capacitor is constructed of 2
sheets of aluminum foil with an area of 2.00
square meters, separated by paper, 0.05 mm
thick, of the same area and a dielectric constant
of 3.7. The homemade capacitor is connected in
series with a
resistor, a switch, and a
6.00-V voltage source. (a) What is the RC time
constant of the circuit? (b) What is the initial
current through the circuit, when the switch is
closed? (c) How long does it take the current to
reach one third of its initial value?
71. A student makes a homemade resistor from a
graphite pencil 5.00 cm long, where the graphite
is 0.05 mm in diameter. The resistivity of the
graphite is
. The
homemade resistor is place in series with a
switch, a 10.00-mF uncharged capacitor and a
0.50-V power source. (a) What is the RC time
constant of the circuit? (b) What is the potential
drop across the pencil 1.00 s after the switch is
closed?
72. The rather simple circuit shown below is known as a
voltage divider. The symbol consisting of three
horizontal lines is represents “ground” and can be
defined as the point where the potential is zero. The
voltage divider is widely used in circuits and a single
voltage source can be used to provide reduced
voltage to a load resistor as shown in the second
part of the figure. (a) What is the output voltage
of circuit (a) in terms of
(b) What
is the output voltage
of circuit (b) in terms of

Access for free at openstax.org

73. Three
resistors are connect in series with
an AAA battery with a rating of 3 AmpHours. (a)
How long can the battery supply the resistors
with power? (b) If the resistors are connected in
parallel, how long can the battery last?
74. Consider a circuit that consists of a real battery
with an emf and an internal resistance of r
connected to a variable resistor R. (a) In order
for the terminal voltage of the battery to be
equal to the emf of the battery, what should the
resistance of the variable resistor be adjusted
to? (b) In order to get the maximum current from
the battery, what should the resistance of the
variable resistor be adjusted to? (c) In order for
the maximum power output of the battery to be
reached, what should the resistance of the
variable resistor be set to?
75. Consider the circuit shown below. What is the
energy stored in each capacitor after the switch has
been closed for a very long time?

76. Consider a circuit consisting of a battery with an
emf and an internal resistance r connected in
series with a resistor R and a capacitor C. Show
that the total energy supplied by the battery
while charging the capacitor is equal to
.
77. Consider the circuit shown below. The terminal
voltages of the batteries are shown. (a) Find the
equivalent resistance of the circuit and the current
out of the battery. (b) Find the current through each
resistor. (c) Find the potential drop across each
resistor. (d) Find the power dissipated by each
resistor. (e) Find the total power supplied by the
batteries.

10 • Chapter Review

459

78. Consider the circuit shown below. (a) What is the
terminal voltage of the battery? (b) What is the
potential drop across resistor
?

83. Apply the loop rule to Loop akledcba in the
preceding problem.

79. Consider the circuit shown below. (a)Determine the
equivalent resistance and the current from the
battery with switch
open. (b) Determine the
equivalent resistance and the current from the
battery with switch
closed.

80. Two resistors, one having a resistance of
,
are connected in parallel to produce a total
resistance of
. (a) What is the value of the
second resistance? (b) What is unreasonable
about this result? (c) Which assumptions are
unreasonable or inconsistent?
81. Two resistors, one having a resistance of
are connected in series to produce a
total resistance of
. (a) What is the
value of the second resistance? (b) What is
unreasonable about this result? (c) Which
assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?
82. Apply the junction rule at point a shown below.

84. Find the currents flowing in the circuit in the
preceding problem. Explicitly show how you
follow the steps in the Problem-Solving Strategy:
Series and Parallel Resistors.
85. Consider the circuit shown below. (a) Find the
current through each resistor. (b) Check the
calculations by analyzing the power in the circuit.

86. A flashing lamp in a Christmas earring is based
on an RC discharge of a capacitor through its
resistance. The effective duration of the flash is
0.250 s, during which it produces an average
0.500 W from an average 3.00 V. (a) What
energy does it dissipate? (b) How much charge
moves through the lamp? (c) Find the
capacitance. (d) What is the resistance of the
lamp? (Since average values are given for some
quantities, the shape of the pulse profile is not
needed.)
87. A
capacitor charged to 450 V is
discharged through a
resistor. (a) Find
the time constant. (b) Calculate the temperature

460

10 • Chapter Review

increase of the resistor, given that its mass is
2.50 g and its specific heat is
noting that most of the thermal energy is
retained in the short time of the discharge. (c)

Calculate the new resistance, assuming it is pure
carbon. (d) Does this change in resistance seem
significant?

Challenge Problems
88. Some camera flashes use flash tubes that
require a high voltage. They obtain a high voltage
by charging capacitors in parallel and then
internally changing the connections of the
capacitors to place them in series. Consider a
circuit that uses four AAA batteries connected in
series to charge six 10-mF capacitors through an
equivalent resistance of
. The connections
are then switched internally to place the
capacitors in series. The capacitors discharge
through a lamp with a resistance of
. (a)
What is the RC time constant and the initial
current out of the batteries while they are
connected in parallel? (b) How long does it take
for the capacitors to charge to
of the
terminal voltages of the batteries? (c) What is
the RC time constant and the initial current of
the capacitors connected in series assuming it
discharges at
of full charge? (d) How long
does it take the current to decrease to
of
the initial value?

essentially consists of a coil of wire with a small
resistance and a pointer with a scale attached.
When current runs through the coil, the pointer
turns; the amount the pointer turns is proportional
to the amount of current running through the coil.
Galvanometers can be used to make an ammeter if a
resistor is placed in parallel with the galvanometer.
Consider a galvanometer that has a resistance of
and gives a full scale reading when a
current runs through it. The galvanometer is to be
used to make an ammeter that has a full scale
reading of 10.00 A, as shown below. Recall that an
ammeter is connected in series with the circuit of
interest, so all 10 A must run through the meter. (a)
What is the current through the parallel resistor in
the meter? (b) What is the voltage across the
parallel resistor? (c) What is the resistance of the
series resistor?

89. Consider the circuit shown below. Each battery
has an emf of 1.50 V and an internal resistance
of
(a) What is the current through the
external resistor, which has a resistance of
10.00 ohms? (b) What is the terminal voltage of
each battery?

90. Analog meters use a galvanometer, which

Access for free at openstax.org

91. Analog meters use a galvanometer, which
essentially consists of a coil of wire with a small
resistance and a pointer with a scale attached.
When current runs through the coil, the point turns;
the amount the pointer turns is proportional to the
amount of current running through the coil.
Galvanometers can be used to make a voltmeter if a
resistor is placed in series with the galvanometer.
Consider a galvanometer that has a resistance of
and gives a full scale reading when a
current runs through it. The galvanometer is to be
used to make an voltmeter that has a full scale

10 • Chapter Review

461

reading of 10.00 V, as shown below. Recall that a
voltmeter is connected in parallel with the
component of interest, so the meter must have a
high resistance or it will change the current running
through the component. (a) What is the potential
drop across the series resistor in the meter? (b)
What is the resistance of the parallel resistor?

94. Consider the circuit below. (a) What is the initial
current through resistor
when the switch is
closed? (b) What is the current through resistor
when the capacitor is fully charged, long after the
switch is closed? (c) What happens if the switch is
opened after it has been closed for some time? (d) If
the switch has been closed for a time period long
enough for the capacitor to become fully charged,
and then the switch is opened, how long before the
current through resistor
reaches half of its initial
value?
92. Consider the circuit shown below. Find

95. Consider the infinitely long chain of resistors shown
below. What is the resistance between terminals a
and b?

93. Consider the circuit below. (a) What is the RC time
constant of the circuit? (b) What is the initial current
in the circuit once the switch is closed? (c) How
much time passes between the instant the switch is
closed and the time the current has reached half of
the initial current?

96. Consider the circuit below. The capacitor has a
capacitance of 10 mF. The switch is closed and
after a long time the capacitor is fully charged. (a)
What is the current through each resistor a long
time after the switch is closed? (b) What is the
voltage across each resistor a long time after the
switch is closed? (c) What is the voltage across
the capacitor a long time after the switch is

462

10 • Chapter Review

closed? (d) What is the charge on the capacitor a
long time after the switch is closed? (e) The
switch is then opened. The capacitor discharges
through the resistors. How long from the time
before the current drops to one fifth of the initial
value?

dorm room, but you are worried that you will
overload the circuit and trip the 15.00-A, 120-V
circuit breaker, which supplies your dorm room.
In your dorm room, you have four 100.00-W
incandescent lamps and a 1500.00-W space
heater. (a) What is the power rating of the
immersion heater? (b) Will it trip the breaker
when everything is turned on? (c) If it you
replace the incandescent bulbs with 18.00-W
LED, will the breaker trip when everything is
turned on?
98. Find the resistance that must be placed in series
with a
galvanometer having a
sensitivity (the same as the one discussed in the
text) to allow it to be used as a voltmeter with a
3000-V full-scale reading. Include a circuit
diagram with your solution.

97. A 120-V immersion heater consists of a coil of
wire that is placed in a cup to boil the water. The
heater can boil one cup of
water in
180.00 seconds. You buy one to use in your

Access for free at openstax.org

99. Find the resistance that must be placed in
parallel with a
galvanometer having a
1.00-mA sensitivity (the same as the one
discussed in the text) to allow it to be used as an
ammeter with a 25.0-A full-scale reading.
Include a circuit diagram with your solution.

CHAPTER 11

Magnetic Forces and Fields

FIGURE 11.1 An industrial electromagnet is capable of lifting thousands of pounds of metallic waste. (credit: modification of work by
“BedfordAl”/Flickr)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
11.1 Magnetism and Its Historical Discoveries
11.2 Magnetic Fields and Lines
11.3 Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic Field
11.4 Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Conductor
11.5 Force and Torque on a Current Loop
11.6 The Hall Effect
11.7 Applications of Magnetic Forces and Fields
INTRODUCTION For the past few chapters, we have been studying electrostatic forces and fields, which are caused
by electric charges at rest. These electric fields can move other free charges, such as producing a current in a circuit;
however, the electrostatic forces and fields themselves come from other static charges. In this chapter, we see that
when an electric charge moves, it generates other forces and fields. These additional forces and fields are what we
commonly call magnetism.
Before we examine the origins of magnetism, we first describe what it is and how magnetic fields behave. Once we
are more familiar with magnetic effects, we can explain how they arise from the behavior of atoms and molecules,
and how magnetism is related to electricity. The connection between electricity and magnetism is fascinating from a
theoretical point of view, but it is also immensely practical, as shown by an industrial electromagnet that can lift
thousands of pounds of metal.

464

11 • Magnetic Forces and Fields

11.1 Magnetism and Its Historical Discoveries
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain attraction and repulsion by magnets
• Describe the historical and contemporary applications of magnetism
Magnetism has been known since the time of the ancient Greeks, but it has always been a bit mysterious. You can
see electricity in the flash of a lightning bolt, but when a compass needle points to magnetic north, you can’t see any
force causing it to rotate. People learned about magnetic properties gradually, over many years, before several
physicists of the nineteenth century connected magnetism with electricity. In this section, we review the basic ideas
of magnetism and describe how they fit into the picture of a magnetic field.

Brief History of Magnetism
Magnets are commonly found in everyday objects, such as toys, hangers, elevators, doorbells, and computer
devices. Experimentation on these magnets shows that all magnets have two poles: One is labeled north (N) and the
other is labeled south (S). Magnetic poles repel if they are alike (both N or both S), they attract if they are opposite
(one N and the other S), and both poles of a magnet attract unmagnetized pieces of iron. An important point to note
here is that you cannot isolate an individual magnetic pole. Every piece of a magnet, no matter how small, which
contains a north pole must also contain a south pole.

INTERACTIVE
Visit this website (https://openstax.org/l/21magnetcompass) for an interactive demonstration of magnetic north and
south poles.
An example of a magnet is a compass needle. It is simply a thin bar magnet suspended at its center, so it is free to
rotate in a horizontal plane. Earth itself also acts like a very large bar magnet, with its south-seeking pole near the
geographic North Pole (Figure 11.2). The north pole of a compass is attracted toward Earth’s geographic North Pole
because the magnetic pole that is near the geographic North Pole is actually a south magnetic pole. Confusion arises
because the geographic term “North Pole” has come to be used (incorrectly) for the magnetic pole that is near the
North Pole. Thus, “north magnetic pole” is actually a misnomer—it should be called the south magnetic pole. [Note
that the orientation of Earth’s magnetic field is not permanent but changes (“flips”) after long time intervals.
Eventually, Earth’s north magnetic pole may be located near its geographic North Pole.]

FIGURE 11.2 The north pole of a compass needle points toward the south pole of a magnet, which is how today’s magnetic field is oriented
from inside Earth. It also points toward Earth’s geographic North Pole because the geographic North Pole is near the magnetic south pole.

Access for free at openstax.org

11.1 • Magnetism and Its Historical Discoveries

Back in 1819, the Danish physicist Hans Oersted was performing a lecture demonstration for some students and
noticed that a compass needle moved whenever current flowed in a nearby wire. Further investigation of this
phenomenon convinced Oersted that an electric current could somehow cause a magnetic force. He reported this
finding to an 1820 meeting of the French Academy of Science.
Soon after this report, Oersted’s investigations were repeated and expanded upon by other scientists. Among those
whose work was especially important were Jean-Baptiste Biot and Felix Savart, who investigated the forces exerted
on magnets by currents; André Marie Ampère, who studied the forces exerted by one current on another; François
Arago, who found that iron could be magnetized by a current; and Humphry Davy, who discovered that a magnet
exerts a force on a wire carrying an electric current. Within 10 years of Oersted’s discovery, Michael Faraday found
that the relative motion of a magnet and a metallic wire induced current in the wire. This finding showed not only
that a current has a magnetic effect, but that a magnet can generate electric current. You will see later that the
names of Biot, Savart, Ampère, and Faraday are linked to some of the fundamental laws of electromagnetism.
The evidence from these various experiments led Ampère to propose that electric current is the source of all
magnetic phenomena. To explain permanent magnets, he suggested that matter contains microscopic current loops
that are somehow aligned when a material is magnetized. Today, we know that permanent magnets are actually
created by the alignment of spinning electrons, a situation quite similar to that proposed by Ampère. This model of
permanent magnets was developed by Ampère almost a century before the atomic nature of matter was
understood. (For a full quantum mechanical treatment of magnetic spins, see Quantum Mechanics
(http://openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-3/pages/7-introduction) and Atomic Structure
(http://openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-3/pages/8-introduction).)

Contemporary Applications of Magnetism
Today, magnetism plays many important roles in our lives. Physicists’ understanding of magnetism has enabled the
development of technologies that affect both individuals and society. The electronic tablet in your purse or
backpack, for example, wouldn’t have been possible without the applications of magnetism and electricity on a
small scale (Figure 11.3). Weak changes in a magnetic field in a thin film of iron and chromium were discovered to
bring about much larger changes in resistance, called giant magnetoresistance. Information can then be recorded
magnetically based on the direction in which the iron layer is magnetized. As a result of the discovery of giant
magnetoresistance and its applications to digital storage, the 2007 Nobel Prize in Physics was awarded to Albert
Fert from France and Peter Grunberg from Germany.

FIGURE 11.3 Engineering technology like computer storage would not be possible without a deep understanding of magnetism. (credit:
Klaus Eifert)

All electric motors—with uses as diverse as powering refrigerators, starting cars, and moving elevators—contain
magnets. Generators, whether producing hydroelectric power or running bicycle lights, use magnetic fields.
Recycling facilities employ magnets to separate iron from other refuse. Research into using magnetic containment
of fusion as a future energy source has been continuing for several years. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has
become an important diagnostic tool in the field of medicine, and the use of magnetism to explore brain activity is a
subject of contemporary research and development. The list of applications also includes computer hard drives,
tape recording, detection of inhaled asbestos, and levitation of high-speed trains. Magnetism is involved in the

465

466

11 • Magnetic Forces and Fields

structure of atomic energy levels, as well as the motion of cosmic rays and charged particles trapped in the Van
Allen belts around Earth. Once again, we see that all these disparate phenomena are linked by a small number of
underlying physical principles.

11.2 Magnetic Fields and Lines
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define the magnetic field based on a moving charge experiencing a force
• Apply the right-hand rule to determine the direction of a magnetic force based on the motion of a charge
in a magnetic field
• Sketch magnetic field lines to understand which way the magnetic field points and how strong it is in a
region of space
We have outlined the properties of magnets, described how they behave, and listed some of the applications of
magnetic properties. Even though there are no such things as isolated magnetic charges, we can still define the
attraction and repulsion of magnets as based on a field. In this section, we define the magnetic field, determine its
direction based on the right-hand rule, and discuss how to draw magnetic field lines.

Defining the Magnetic Field
A magnetic field is defined by the force that a charged particle experiences moving in this field, after we account for
the gravitational and any additional electric forces possible on the charge. The magnitude of this force is
proportional to the amount of charge q, the speed of the charged particle v, and the magnitude of the applied
magnetic field. The direction of this force is perpendicular to both the direction of the moving charged particle and
the direction of the applied magnetic field. Based on these observations, we define the magnetic field strength B
based on the magnetic force
field, that is,

on a charge q moving at velocity

as the cross product of the velocity and magnetic
11.1

In fact, this is how we define the magnetic field —in terms of the force on a charged particle moving in a magnetic
field. The magnitude of the force is determined from the definition of the cross product as it relates to the
magnitudes of each of the vectors. In other words, the magnitude of the force satisfies
11.2
where θ is the angle between the velocity and the magnetic field.
The SI unit for magnetic field strength B is called the tesla (T) after the eccentric but brilliant inventor Nikola Tesla
(1856–1943), where
11.3
A smaller unit, called the gauss (G), where
is sometimes used. The strongest permanent magnets
have fields near 2 T; superconducting electromagnets may attain 10 T or more. Earth’s magnetic field on its surface
is only about
or 0.5 G.

PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Direction of the Magnetic Field by the Right-Hand Rule
The direction of the magnetic force is perpendicular to the plane formed by
hand rule-1 (or RHR-1), which is illustrated in Figure 11.4.

and

as determined by the right-

1. Orient your right hand so that your fingers curl in the plane defined by the velocity and magnetic field vectors.

Access for free at openstax.org

11.2 • Magnetic Fields and Lines

2. Using your right hand, sweep from the velocity toward the magnetic field with your fingers through the
smallest angle possible.
3. The magnetic force is directed where your thumb is pointing.
4. If the charge was negative, reverse the direction found by these steps.

FIGURE 11.4 Magnetic fields exert forces on moving charges. The direction of the magnetic force on a moving charge is perpendicular to
the plane formed by

and

and follows the right-hand rule-1 (RHR-1) as shown. The magnitude of the force is proportional to

the sine of the angle between

and

and

INTERACTIVE
Visit this website (https://openstax.org/l/21magfields) for additional practice with the direction of magnetic fields.
There is no magnetic force on static charges. However, there is a magnetic force on charges moving at an angle to a
magnetic field. When charges are stationary, their electric fields do not affect magnets. However, when charges
move, they produce magnetic fields that exert forces on other magnets. When there is relative motion, a connection
between electric and magnetic forces emerges—each affects the other.

EXAMPLE 11.1
An Alpha-Particle Moving in a Magnetic Field
An alpha-particle

moves through a uniform magnetic field whose magnitude is 1.5 T. The field

is directly parallel to the positive z-axis of the rectangular coordinate system of Figure 11.5. What is the magnetic
force on the alpha-particle when it is moving (a) in the positive x-direction with a speed of
(b) in the
negative y-direction with a speed of
(c) in the positive z-direction with a speed of
(d) with a velocity

467

468

11 • Magnetic Forces and Fields

FIGURE 11.5 The magnetic forces on an alpha-particle moving in a uniform magnetic field. The field is the same in each drawing, but the
velocity is different.

Strategy
We are given the charge, its velocity, and the magnetic field strength and direction. We can thus use the equation
or

to calculate the force. The direction of the force is determined by RHR-1.

Solution
a. First, to determine the direction, start with your fingers pointing in the positive x-direction. Sweep your fingers
upward in the direction of magnetic field. Your thumb should point in the negative y-direction. This should
match the mathematical answer. To calculate the force, we use the given charge, velocity, and magnetic field
and the definition of the magnetic force in cross-product form to calculate:

b. First, to determine the directionality, start with your fingers pointing in the negative y-direction. Sweep your
fingers upward in the direction of magnetic field as in the previous problem. Your thumb should be open in the
negative x-direction. This should match the mathematical answer. To calculate the force, we use the given
charge, velocity, and magnetic field and the definition of the magnetic force in cross-product form to calculate:

An alternative approach is to use Equation 11.2 to find the magnitude of the force. This applies for both parts
(a) and (b). Since the velocity is perpendicular to the magnetic field, the angle between them is 90 degrees.
Therefore, the magnitude of the force is:

c. Since the velocity and magnetic field are parallel to each other, there is no orientation of your hand that will

Access for free at openstax.org

11.2 • Magnetic Fields and Lines

result in a force direction. Therefore, the force on this moving charge is zero. This is confirmed by the cross
product. When you cross two vectors pointing in the same direction, the result is equal to zero.
d. First, to determine the direction, your fingers could point in any orientation; however, you must sweep your
fingers upward in the direction of the magnetic field. As you rotate your hand, notice that the thumb can point
in any x- or y-direction possible, but not in the z-direction. This should match the mathematical answer. To
calculate the force, we use the given charge, velocity, and magnetic field and the definition of the magnetic
force in cross-product form to calculate:

This solution can be rewritten in terms of a magnitude and angle in the xy-plane:

The magnitude of the force can also be calculated using Equation 11.2. The velocity in this question, however,
has three components. The z-component of the velocity can be neglected, because it is parallel to the
magnetic field and therefore generates no force. The magnitude of the velocity is calculated from the x- and
y-components. The angle between the velocity in the xy-plane and the magnetic field in the z-plane is 90
degrees. Therefore, the force is calculated to be:

This is the same magnitude of force calculated by unit vectors.
Significance
The cross product in this formula results in a third vector that must be perpendicular to the other two. Other
physical quantities, such as angular momentum, also have three vectors that are related by the cross product. Note
that typical force values in magnetic force problems are much larger than the gravitational force. Therefore, for an
isolated charge, the magnetic force is the dominant force governing the charge’s motion.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 11.1
Repeat the previous problem with the magnetic field in the x-direction rather than in the z-direction. Check your
answers with RHR-1.

Representing Magnetic Fields
The representation of magnetic fields by magnetic field lines is very useful in visualizing the strength and direction
of the magnetic field. As shown in Figure 11.6, each of these lines forms a closed loop, even if not shown by the
constraints of the space available for the figure. The field lines emerge from the north pole (N), loop around to the
south pole (S), and continue through the bar magnet back to the north pole.
Magnetic field lines have several hard-and-fast rules:
1. The direction of the magnetic field is tangent to the field line at any point in space. A small compass will point
in the direction of the field line.
2. The strength of the field is proportional to the closeness of the lines. It is exactly proportional to the number of
lines per unit area perpendicular to the lines (called the areal density).
3. Magnetic field lines can never cross, meaning that the field is unique at any point in space.
4. Magnetic field lines are continuous, forming closed loops without a beginning or end. They are directed from
the north pole to the south pole.

469

470

11 • Magnetic Forces and Fields

The last property is related to the fact that the north and south poles cannot be separated. It is a distinct difference
from electric field lines, which generally begin on positive charges and end on negative charges or at infinity. If
isolated magnetic charges (referred to as magnetic monopoles) existed, then magnetic field lines would begin and
end on them.

FIGURE 11.6 Magnetic field lines are defined to have the direction in which a small compass points when placed at a location in the field.
The strength of the field is proportional to the closeness (or density) of the lines. Magnetic field lines present inside the magnet or outside
the field of view are not shown given the space constraints of the figure. If the rest of the magnetic field line was shown, it would form a
continuous loop.

11.3 Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic Field
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain how a charged particle in an external magnetic field undergoes circular motion
• Describe how to determine the radius of the circular motion of a charged particle in a magnetic field
A charged particle experiences a force when moving through a magnetic field. What happens if this field is uniform
over the motion of the charged particle? What path does the particle follow? In this section, we discuss the circular
motion of the charged particle as well as other motion that results from a charged particle entering a magnetic field.
The simplest case occurs when a charged particle moves perpendicular to a uniform B-field (Figure 11.7). If the field
is in a vacuum, the magnetic field is the dominant factor determining the motion. Since the magnetic force is
perpendicular to the direction of travel, a charged particle follows a curved path in a magnetic field. The particle
continues to follow this curved path until it forms a complete circle. Another way to look at this is that the magnetic
force is always perpendicular to velocity, so that it does no work on the charged particle. The particle’s kinetic
energy and speed thus remain constant. The direction of motion is affected but not the speed.

Access for free at openstax.org

11.3 • Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic Field

FIGURE 11.7 A negatively charged particle moves in the plane of the paper in a region where the magnetic field is perpendicular to the
paper (represented by the small ’s—like the tails of arrows). The magnetic force is perpendicular to the velocity, so velocity changes in
direction but not magnitude. The result is uniform circular motion. (Note that because the charge is negative, the force is opposite in
direction to the prediction of the right-hand rule.)

In this situation, the magnetic force supplies the centripetal force

Noting that the velocity is

perpendicular to the magnetic field, the magnitude of the magnetic force is reduced to
magnetic force F supplies the centripetal force
we have

Because the
11.4

Solving for r yields
11.5

Here, r is the radius of curvature of the path of a charged particle with mass m and charge q, moving at a speed v
that is perpendicular to a magnetic field of strength B. The time for the charged particle to go around the circular
path is defined as the period, which is the same as the distance traveled (the circumference) divided by the speed.
Based on this and Equation 11.4, we can derive the period of motion as
11.6

If the velocity is not perpendicular to the magnetic field, then we can compare each component of the velocity
separately with the magnetic field. The component of the velocity perpendicular to the magnetic field produces a
magnetic force perpendicular to both this velocity and the field:
11.7
where is the angle between v and B. The component parallel to the magnetic field creates constant motion along
the same direction as the magnetic field, also shown in Equation 11.7. The parallel motion determines the pitch p of
the helix, which is the distance between adjacent turns. This distance equals the parallel component of the velocity
times the period:
11.8
The result is a helical motion, as shown in the following figure.

471

472

11 • Magnetic Forces and Fields

FIGURE 11.8 A charged particle moving with a velocity not in the same direction as the magnetic field. The velocity component
perpendicular to the magnetic field creates circular motion, whereas the component of the velocity parallel to the field moves the particle
along a straight line. The pitch is the horizontal distance between two consecutive circles. The resulting motion is helical.

While the charged particle travels in a helical path, it may enter a region where the magnetic field is not uniform. In
particular, suppose a particle travels from a region of strong magnetic field to a region of weaker field, then back to a
region of stronger field. The particle may reflect back before entering the stronger magnetic field region. This is
similar to a wave on a string traveling from a very light, thin string to a hard wall and reflecting backward. If the
reflection happens at both ends, the particle is trapped in a so-called magnetic bottle.
Trapped particles in magnetic fields are found in the Van Allen radiation belts around Earth, which are part of Earth’s
magnetic field. These belts were discovered by James Van Allen while trying to measure the flux of cosmic rays on
Earth (high-energy particles that come from outside the solar system) to see whether this was similar to the flux
measured on Earth. Van Allen found that due to the contribution of particles trapped in Earth’s magnetic field, the
flux was much higher on Earth than in outer space. Aurorae, like the famous aurora borealis (northern lights) in the
Northern Hemisphere (Figure 11.9), are beautiful displays of light emitted as ions recombine with electrons entering
the atmosphere as they spiral along magnetic field lines. (The ions are primarily oxygen and nitrogen atoms that are
initially ionized by collisions with energetic particles in Earth’s atmosphere.) Aurorae have also been observed on
other planets, such as Jupiter and Saturn.

FIGURE 11.9 (a) The Van Allen radiation belts around Earth trap ions produced by cosmic rays striking Earth’s atmosphere. (b) The
magnificent spectacle of the aurora borealis, or northern lights, glows in the northern sky above Bear Lake near Eielson Air Force Base,
Alaska. Shaped by Earth’s magnetic field, this light is produced by glowing molecules and ions of oxygen and nitrogen. (credit b:
modification of work by USAF Senior Airman Joshua Strang)

Access for free at openstax.org

11.3 • Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic Field

EXAMPLE 11.2
Beam Deflector
A research group is investigating short-lived radioactive isotopes. They need to design a way to transport alphaparticles (helium nuclei) from where they are made to a place where they will collide with another material to form
an isotope. The beam of alpha-particles
bends through a 90-degree
region with a uniform magnetic field of 0.050 T (Figure 11.10). (a) In what direction should the magnetic field be
applied? (b) How much time does it take the alpha-particles to traverse the uniform magnetic field region?

FIGURE 11.10 Top view of the beam deflector setup.

Strategy
a. The direction of the magnetic field is shown by the RHR-1. Your fingers point in the direction of v, and your
thumb needs to point in the direction of the force, to the left. Therefore, since the alpha-particles are
positively charged, the magnetic field must point down.
b. The period of the alpha-particle going around the circle is
11.9

Because the particle is only going around a quarter of a circle, we can take 0.25 times the period to find the
time it takes to go around this path.
Solution
a. Let’s start by focusing on the alpha-particle entering the field near the bottom of the picture. First, point your
thumb up the page. In order for your palm to open to the left where the centripetal force (and hence the
magnetic force) points, your fingers need to change orientation until they point into the page. This is the
direction of the applied magnetic field.
b. The period of the charged particle going around a circle is calculated by using the given mass, charge, and
magnetic field in the problem. This works out to be

However, for the given problem, the alpha-particle goes around a quarter of the circle, so the time it takes
would be

473

474

11 • Magnetic Forces and Fields

Significance
This time may be quick enough to get to the material we would like to bombard, depending on how short-lived the
radioactive isotope is and continues to emit alpha-particles. If we could increase the magnetic field applied in the
region, this would shorten the time even more. The path the particles need to take could be shortened, but this may
not be economical given the experimental setup.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 11.2
A uniform magnetic field of magnitude 1.5 T is directed horizontally from west to east. (a) What is the magnetic force
on a proton at the instant when it is moving vertically downward in the field with a speed of
(b)
Compare this force with the weight w of a proton.

EXAMPLE 11.3
Helical Motion in a Magnetic Field
A proton enters a uniform magnetic field of
with a speed of
At what angle must the
magnetic field be from the velocity so that the pitch of the resulting helical motion is equal to the radius of the helix?
Strategy
The pitch of the motion relates to the parallel velocity times the period of the circular motion, whereas the radius
relates to the perpendicular velocity component. After setting the radius and the pitch equal to each other, solve for
the angle between the magnetic field and velocity or
Solution
The pitch is given by Equation 11.8, the period is given by Equation 11.6, and the radius of circular motion is given
by Equation 11.5. Note that the velocity in the radius equation is related to only the perpendicular velocity, which is
where the circular motion occurs. Therefore, we substitute the sine component of the overall velocity into the radius
equation to equate the pitch and radius:

Significance
If this angle were
only parallel velocity would occur and the helix would not form, because there would be no
circular motion in the perpendicular plane. If this angle were
only circular motion would occur and there would
be no movement of the circles perpendicular to the motion. That is what creates the helical motion.

11.4 Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Conductor
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Determine the direction in which a current-carrying wire experiences a force in an external magnetic field
• Calculate the force on a current-carrying wire in an external magnetic field
Moving charges experience a force in a magnetic field. If these moving charges are in a wire—that is, if the wire is
carrying a current—the wire should also experience a force. However, before we discuss the force exerted on a
current by a magnetic field, we first examine the magnetic field generated by an electric current. We are studying
two separate effects here that interact closely: A current-carrying wire generates a magnetic field and the magnetic

Access for free at openstax.org

11.4 • Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Conductor

field exerts a force on the current-carrying wire.

Magnetic Fields Produced by Electrical Currents
When discussing historical discoveries in magnetism, we mentioned Oersted’s finding that a wire carrying an
electrical current caused a nearby compass to deflect. A connection was established that electrical currents
produce magnetic fields. (This connection between electricity and magnetism is discussed in more detail in Sources
of Magnetic Fields.)
The compass needle near the wire experiences a force that aligns the needle tangent to a circle around the wire.
Therefore, a current-carrying wire produces circular loops of magnetic field. To determine the direction of the
magnetic field generated from a wire, we use a second right-hand rule. In RHR-2, your thumb points in the direction
of the current while your fingers wrap around the wire, pointing in the direction of the magnetic field produced
(Figure 11.11). If the magnetic field were coming at you or out of the page, we represent this with a dot. If the
magnetic field were going into the page, we represent this with an
These symbols come from considering a vector
arrow: An arrow pointed toward you, from your perspective, would look like a dot or the tip of an arrow. An arrow
pointed away from you, from your perspective, would look like a cross or an
A composite sketch of the magnetic
circles is shown in Figure 11.11, where the field strength is shown to decrease as you get farther from the wire by
loops that are farther separated.

FIGURE 11.11 (a) When the wire is in the plane of the paper, the field is perpendicular to the paper. Note the symbols used for the field
pointing inward (like the tail of an arrow) and the field pointing outward (like the tip of an arrow). (b) A long and straight wire creates a field
with magnetic field lines forming circular loops.

Calculating the Magnetic Force
Electric current is an ordered movement of charge. A current-carrying wire in a magnetic field must therefore
experience a force due to the field. To investigate this force, let’s consider the infinitesimal section of wire as shown
in Figure 11.12. The length and cross-sectional area of the section are dl and A, respectively, so its volume is
The wire is formed from material that contains n charge carriers per unit volume, so the number of
charge carriers in the section is
If the charge carriers move with drift velocity
the current I in the wire is
(from Current and Resistance)

The magnetic force on any single charge carrier is
carriers in the section of wire is

so the total magnetic force

on the

charge
11.10

We can define dl to be a vector of length dl pointing along

which allows us to rewrite this equation as
11.11

or
11.12

475

476

11 • Magnetic Forces and Fields

This is the magnetic force on the section of wire. Note that it is actually the net force exerted by the field on the
charge carriers themselves. The direction of this force is given by RHR-1, where you point your fingers in the
direction of the current and curl them toward the field. Your thumb then points in the direction of the force.

FIGURE 11.12 An infinitesimal section of current-carrying wire in a magnetic field.

To determine the magnetic force on a wire of arbitrary length and shape, we must integrate Equation 11.12 over
the entire wire. If the wire section happens to be straight and B is uniform, the equation differentials become
absolute quantities, giving us
11.13
This is the force on a straight, current-carrying wire in a uniform magnetic field.

EXAMPLE 11.4
Balancing the Gravitational and Magnetic Forces on a Current-Carrying Wire
A wire of length 50 cm and mass 10 g is suspended in a horizontal plane by a pair of flexible leads (Figure 11.13).
The wire is then subjected to a constant magnetic field of magnitude 0.50 T, which is directed as shown. What are
the magnitude and direction of the current in the wire needed to remove the tension in the supporting leads?

FIGURE 11.13 (a) A wire suspended in a magnetic field. (b) The free-body diagram for the wire.

Strategy
From the free-body diagram in the figure, the tensions in the supporting leads go to zero when the gravitational and

Access for free at openstax.org

11.4 • Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Conductor

magnetic forces balance each other. Using the RHR-1, we find that the magnetic force points up. We can then
determine the current I by equating the two forces.
Solution
Equate the two forces of weight and magnetic force on the wire:

Thus,

Significance
This large magnetic field creates a significant force on a length of wire to counteract the weight of the wire.

EXAMPLE 11.5
Calculating Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Wire
A long, rigid wire lying along the y-axis carries a 5.0-A current flowing in the positive y-direction. (a) If a constant
magnetic field of magnitude 0.30 T is directed along the positive x-axis, what is the magnetic force per unit length
on the wire? (b) If a constant magnetic field of 0.30 T is directed 30 degrees from the +x-axis towards the +y-axis,
what is the magnetic force per unit length on the wire?
Strategy
The magnetic force on a current-carrying wire in a magnetic field is given by
For part a, since the
current and magnetic field are perpendicular in this problem, we can simplify the formula to give us the magnitude
and find the direction through the RHR-1. The angle θ is 90 degrees, which means
Also, the length can be
divided over to the left-hand side to find the force per unit length. For part b, the current times length is written in
unit vector notation, as well as the magnetic field. After the cross product is taken, the directionality is evident by
the resulting unit vector.
Solution
a. We start with the general formula for the magnetic force on a wire. We are looking for the force per unit length,
so we divide by the length to bring it to the left-hand side. We also set
The solution therefore is

Directionality: Point your fingers in the positive y-direction and curl your fingers in the positive x-direction.
Your thumb will point in the

direction. Therefore, with directionality, the solution is

b. The current times length and the magnetic field are written in unit vector notation. Then, we take the cross
product to find the force:

Significance
This large magnetic field creates a significant force on a small length of wire. As the angle of the magnetic field
becomes more closely aligned to the current in the wire, there is less of a force on it, as seen from comparing parts a
and b.

477

478

11 • Magnetic Forces and Fields

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 11.3
A straight, flexible length of copper wire is immersed in a magnetic field that is directed into the page. (a) If the
wire’s current runs in the +x-direction, which way will the wire bend? (b) Which way will the wire bend if the current
runs in the –x-direction?

EXAMPLE 11.6
Force on a Circular Wire
A circular current loop of radius R carrying a current I is placed in the xy-plane. A constant uniform magnetic field
cuts through the loop parallel to the y-axis (Figure 11.14). Find the magnetic force on the upper half of the loop, the
lower half of the loop, and the total force on the loop.

FIGURE 11.14 A loop of wire carrying a current in a magnetic field.

Strategy
The magnetic force on the upper loop should be written in terms of the differential force acting on each segment of
the loop. If we integrate over each differential piece, we solve for the overall force on that section of the loop. The
force on the lower loop is found in a similar manner, and the total force is the addition of these two forces.
Solution
A differential force on an arbitrary piece of wire located on the upper ring is:
where is the angle between the magnetic field direction (+y) and the segment of wire. A differential segment is
located at the same radius, so using an arc-length formula, we have:

In order to find the force on a segment, we integrate over the upper half of the circle, from 0 to

The lower half of the loop is integrated from

This results in:

to zero, giving us:

The net force is the sum of these forces, which is zero.
Significance
The total force on any closed loop in a uniform magnetic field is zero. Even though each piece of the loop has a force

Access for free at openstax.org

11.5 • Force and Torque on a Current Loop

acting on it, the net force on the system is zero. (Note that there is a net torque on the loop, which we consider in the
next section.)

11.5 Force and Torque on a Current Loop
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Evaluate the net force on a current loop in an external magnetic field
• Evaluate the net torque on a current loop in an external magnetic field
• Define the magnetic dipole moment of a current loop
Motors are the most common application of magnetic force on current-carrying wires. Motors contain loops of wire
in a magnetic field. When current is passed through the loops, the magnetic field exerts torque on the loops, which
rotates a shaft. Electrical energy is converted into mechanical work in the process. Once the loop’s surface area is
aligned with the magnetic field, the direction of current is reversed, so there is a continual torque on the loop (Figure
11.15). This reversal of the current is done with commutators and brushes. The commutator is set to reverse the
current flow at set points to keep continual motion in the motor. A basic commutator has three contact areas to
avoid and dead spots where the loop would have zero instantaneous torque at that point. The brushes press against
the commutator, creating electrical contact between parts of the commutator during the spinning motion.

FIGURE 11.15 A simplified version of a dc electric motor. (a) The rectangular wire loop is placed in a magnetic field. The forces on the wires
closest to the magnetic poles (N and S) are opposite in direction as determined by the right-hand rule-1. Therefore, the loop has a net
torque and rotates to the position shown in (b). (b) The brushes now touch the commutator segments so that no current flows through the
loop. No torque acts on the loop, but the loop continues to spin from the initial velocity given to it in part (a). By the time the loop flips over,
current flows through the wires again but now in the opposite direction, and the process repeats as in part (a). This causes continual
rotation of the loop.

In a uniform magnetic field, a current-carrying loop of wire, such as a loop in a motor, experiences both forces and
torques on the loop. Figure 11.16 shows a rectangular loop of wire that carries a current I and has sides of lengths a
and b. The loop is in a uniform magnetic field:

The magnetic force on a straight current-carrying wire of

length l is given by
To find the net force on the loop, we have to apply this equation to each of the four
sides. The force on side 1 is
11.14
where the direction has been determined with the RHR-1. The current in side 3 flows in the opposite direction to
that of side 1, so
11.15
The currents in sides 2 and 4 are perpendicular to

and the forces on these sides are

479

480

11 • Magnetic Forces and Fields

11.16
We can now find the net force on the loop:
11.17
Although this result
has been obtained for a rectangular loop, it is far more general and holds for currentcarrying loops of arbitrary shapes; that is, there is no net force on a current loop in a uniform magnetic field.

FIGURE 11.16 (a) A rectangular current loop in a uniform magnetic field is subjected to a net torque but not a net force. (b) A side view of
the coil.

To find the net torque on the current loop shown in Figure 11.16, we first consider
and
Since they have the
same line of action and are equal and opposite, the sum of their torques about any axis is zero (see Fixed-Axis
Rotation (http://openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-1/pages/10-introduction)). Thus, if there is any
torque on the loop, it must be furnished by
and
Let’s calculate the torques around the axis that passes
through point O of Figure 11.16 (a side view of the coil) and is perpendicular to the plane of the page. The point O is
a distance x from side 2 and a distance
from side 4 of the loop. The moment arms of
and
are
and
respectively, so the net torque on the loop is
11.18

This simplifies to
11.19
where

is the area of the loop.

Notice that this torque is independent of x; it is therefore independent of where point O is located in the plane of the
current loop. Consequently, the loop experiences the same torque from the magnetic field about any axis in the
plane of the loop and parallel to the x-axis.
A closed-current loop is commonly referred to as a magnetic dipole and the term IA is known as its magnetic
dipole moment Actually, the magnetic dipole moment is a vector that is defined as
11.20
where is a unit vector directed perpendicular to the plane of the loop (see Figure 11.16). The direction of is
obtained with the RHR-2—if you curl the fingers of your right hand in the direction of current flow in the loop, then
your thumb points along If the loop contains N turns of wire, then its magnetic dipole moment is given by
11.21
In terms of the magnetic dipole moment, the torque on a current loop due to a uniform magnetic field can be written

Access for free at openstax.org

11.6 • The Hall Effect

simply as
11.22
This equation holds for a current loop in a two-dimensional plane of arbitrary shape.
Using a calculation analogous to that found in Capacitance for an electric dipole, the potential energy of a magnetic
dipole is
11.23

EXAMPLE 11.7
Forces and Torques on Current-Carrying Loops
A circular current loop of radius 2.0 cm carries a current of 2.0 mA. (a) What is the magnitude of its magnetic dipole
moment? (b) If the dipole is oriented at 30 degrees to a uniform magnetic field of magnitude 0.50 T, what is the
magnitude of the torque it experiences and what is its potential energy?
Strategy
The dipole moment is defined by the current times the area of the loop. The area of the loop can be calculated from
the area of the circle. The torque on the loop and potential energy are calculated from identifying the magnetic
moment, magnetic field, and angle oriented in the field.
Solution
a. The magnetic moment μ is calculated by the current times the area of the loop or
b. The torque and potential energy are calculated by identifying the magnetic moment, magnetic field, and the
angle between these two vectors. The calculations of these quantities are:

Significance
The concept of magnetic moment at the atomic level is discussed in the next chapter. The concept of aligning the
magnetic moment with the magnetic field is the functionality of devices like magnetic motors, whereby switching
the external magnetic field results in a constant spinning of the loop as it tries to align with the field to minimize its
potential energy.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 11.4
Check Your Understanding
In what orientation would a magnetic dipole have to be to produce (a) a maximum torque in a magnetic field? (b) A
maximum energy of the dipole?

11.6 The Hall Effect
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain a scenario where the magnetic and electric fields are crossed and their forces balance each other
as a charged particle moves through a velocity selector
• Compare how charge carriers move in a conductive material and explain how this relates to the Hall effect

481

482

11 • Magnetic Forces and Fields

In 1879, E.H. Hall devised an experiment that can be used to identify the sign of the predominant charge carriers in
a conducting material. From a historical perspective, this experiment was the first to demonstrate that the charge
carriers in most metals are negative.

INTERACTIVE
Visit this website (https://openstax.org/l/21halleffect) to find more information about the Hall effect.
We investigate the Hall effect by studying the motion of the free electrons along a metallic strip of width l in a
constant magnetic field (Figure 11.17). The electrons are moving from left to right, so the magnetic force they
experience pushes them to the bottom edge of the strip. This leaves an excess of positive charge at the top edge of
the strip, resulting in an electric field E directed from top to bottom. The charge concentration at both edges builds
up until the electric force on the electrons in one direction is balanced by the magnetic force on them in the opposite
direction. Equilibrium is reached when:
11.24
where e is the magnitude of the electron charge,
is the drift speed of the electrons, and E is the magnitude of the
electric field created by the separated charge. Solving this for the drift speed results in
11.25

FIGURE 11.17 In the Hall effect, a potential difference between the top and bottom edges of the metal strip is produced when moving
charge carriers are deflected by the magnetic field. (a) Hall effect for negative charge carriers; (b) Hall effect for positive charge carriers.

A scenario where the electric and magnetic fields are perpendicular to one another is called a crossed-field
situation. If these fields produce equal and opposite forces on a charged particle with the velocity that equates the
forces, these particles are able to pass through an apparatus, called a velocity selector, undeflected. This velocity is
represented in Equation 11.25. Any other velocity of a charged particle sent into the same fields would be deflected
by the magnetic force or electric force.
Going back to the Hall effect, if the current in the strip is I, then from Current and Resistance, we know that

11.26

where n is the number of charge carriers per volume and A is the cross-sectional area of the strip. Combining the
equations for
and I results in
11.27
The field E is related to the potential difference V between the edges of the strip by
11.28
The quantity V is called the Hall potential and can be measured with a voltmeter. Finally, combining the equations

Access for free at openstax.org

11.6 • The Hall Effect

for I and E gives us
11.29

where the upper edge of the strip in Figure 11.17 is positive with respect to the lower edge.
We can also combine Equation 11.24 and Equation 11.28 to get an expression for the Hall voltage in terms of the
magnetic field:
11.30
What if the charge carriers are positive, as in Figure 11.17? For the same current I, the magnitude of V is still given
by Equation 11.29. However, the upper edge is now negative with respect to the lower edge. Therefore, by simply
measuring the sign of V, we can determine the sign of the majority charge carriers in a metal.
Hall potential measurements show that electrons are the dominant charge carriers in most metals. However, Hall
potentials indicate that for a few metals, such as tungsten, beryllium, and many semiconductors, the majority of
charge carriers are positive. It turns out that conduction by positive charge is caused by the migration of missing
electron sites (called holes) on ions. Conduction by holes is studied later in Condensed Matter Physics
(http://openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-3/pages/9-introduction).
The Hall effect can be used to measure magnetic fields. If a material with a known density of charge carriers n is
placed in a magnetic field and V is measured, then the field can be determined from Equation 11.29. In research
laboratories where the fields of electromagnets used for precise measurements have to be extremely steady, a “Hall
probe” is commonly used as part of an electronic circuit that regulates the field.

EXAMPLE 11.8
Velocity Selector
An electron beam enters a crossed-field velocity selector with magnetic and electric fields of 2.0 mT and
respectively. (a) What must the velocity of the electron beam be to traverse the crossed fields
undeflected? If the electric field is turned off, (b) what is the acceleration of the electron beam and (c) what is the
radius of the circular motion that results?
Strategy
The electron beam is not deflected by either of the magnetic or electric fields if these forces are balanced. Based on
these balanced forces, we calculate the velocity of the beam. Without the electric field, only the magnetic force is
used in Newton’s second law to find the acceleration. Lastly, the radius of the path is based on the resulting circular
motion from the magnetic force.
Solution
a. The velocity of the unperturbed beam of electrons with crossed fields is calculated by Equation 11.25:

b. The acceleration is calculated from the net force from the magnetic field, equal to mass times acceleration.
The magnitude of the acceleration is:

c. The radius of the path comes from a balance of the circular and magnetic forces, or Equation 11.25:

483

484

11 • Magnetic Forces and Fields

Significance
If electrons in the beam had velocities above or below the answer in part (a), those electrons would have a stronger
net force exerted by either the magnetic or electric field. Therefore, only those electrons at this specific velocity
would make it through.

EXAMPLE 11.9
The Hall Potential in a Silver Ribbon
Figure 11.18 shows a silver ribbon whose cross section is 1.0 cm by 0.20 cm. The ribbon carries a current of 100 A
from left to right, and it lies in a uniform magnetic field of magnitude 1.5 T. Using a density value of
electrons per cubic meter for silver, find the Hall potential between the edges of the ribbon.

FIGURE 11.18 Finding the Hall potential in a silver ribbon in a magnetic field is shown.

Strategy
Since the majority of charge carriers are electrons, the polarity of the Hall voltage is that indicated in the figure. The
value of the Hall voltage is calculated using Equation 11.29:

Solution
When calculating the Hall voltage, we need to know the current through the material, the magnetic field, the length,
the number of charge carriers, and the area. Since all of these are given, the Hall voltage is calculated as:

Significance
As in this example, the Hall potential is generally very small, and careful experimentation with sensitive equipment
is required for its measurement.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 11.5
A Hall probe consists of a copper strip,
electrons per cubic meter, which is 2.0 cm wide and 0.10
cm thick. What is the magnetic field when I = 50 A and the Hall potential is (a)
and (b)

11.7 Applications of Magnetic Forces and Fields
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain how a mass spectrometer works to separate charges
• Explain how a cyclotron works
Being able to manipulate and sort charged particles allows deeper experimentation to understand what matter is

Access for free at openstax.org

11.7 • Applications of Magnetic Forces and Fields

made of. We first look at a mass spectrometer to see how we can separate ions by their charge-to-mass ratio. Then
we discuss cyclotrons as a method to accelerate charges to very high energies.

Mass Spectrometer
The mass spectrometer is a device that separates ions according to their charge-to-mass ratios. One particular
version, the Bainbridge mass spectrometer, is illustrated in Figure 11.19. Ions produced at a source are first sent
through a velocity selector, where the magnetic force is equally balanced with the electric force. These ions all
emerge with the same speed
since any ion with a different velocity is deflected preferentially by either the
electric or magnetic force, and ultimately blocked from the next stage. They then enter a uniform magnetic field
where they travel in a circular path whose radius R is given by Equation 11.3. The radius is measured by a particle
detector located as shown in the figure.

FIGURE 11.19 A schematic of the Bainbridge mass spectrometer, showing charged particles leaving a source, followed by a velocity
selector where the electric and magnetic forces are balanced, followed by a region of uniform magnetic field where the particle is ultimately
detected.

The relationship between the charge-to-mass ratio q/m and the radius R is determined by combining Equation 11.3
and Equation 11.25:
11.31

Since most ions are singly charged

measured values of R can be used with this equation to

determine the mass of ions. With modern instruments, masses can be determined to one part in
An interesting use of a spectrometer is as part of a system for detecting very small leaks in a research apparatus. In
low-temperature physics laboratories, a device known as a dilution refrigerator uses a mixture of He-3, He-4, and
other cryogens to reach temperatures well below 1 K. The performance of the refrigerator is severely hampered if
even a minute leak between its various components occurs. Consequently, before it is cooled down to the desired
temperature, the refrigerator is subjected to a leak test. A small quantity of gaseous helium is injected into one of its
compartments, while an adjacent, but supposedly isolated, compartment is connected to a high-vacuum pump to
which a mass spectrometer is attached. A heated filament ionizes any helium atoms evacuated by the pump. The
detection of these ions by the spectrometer then indicates a leak between the two compartments of the dilution
refrigerator.

485

486

11 • Magnetic Forces and Fields

In conjunction with gas chromatography, mass spectrometers are used widely to identify unknown substances.
While the gas chromatography portion breaks down the substance, the mass spectrometer separates the resulting
ionized molecules. This technique is used with fire debris to ascertain the cause, in law enforcement to identify
illegal drugs, in security to identify explosives, and in many medicinal applications.

Cyclotron
The cyclotron was developed by E.O. Lawrence to accelerate charged particles (usually protons, deuterons, or
alpha-particles) to large kinetic energies. These particles are then used for nuclear-collision experiments to produce
radioactive isotopes. A cyclotron is illustrated in Figure 11.20. The particles move between two flat, semi-cylindrical
metallic containers D1 and D2, called dees. The dees are enclosed in a larger metal container, and the apparatus is
placed between the poles of an electromagnet that provides a uniform magnetic field. Air is removed from the large
container so that the particles neither lose energy nor are deflected because of collisions with air molecules. The
dees are connected to a high-frequency voltage source that provides an alternating electric field in the small region
between them. Because the dees are made of metal, their interiors are shielded from the electric field.

FIGURE 11.20 The inside of a cyclotron. A uniform magnetic field is applied as circulating protons travel through the dees, gaining energy
as they traverse through the gap between the dees.

Suppose a positively charged particle is injected into the gap between the dees when D2 is at a positive potential
relative to D1. The particle is then accelerated across the gap and enters D1 after gaining kinetic energy qV, where V
is the average potential difference the particle experiences between the dees. When the particle is inside D1, only
the uniform magnetic field

of the electromagnet acts on it, so the particle moves in a circle of radius
11.32

with a period of
11.33
The period of the alternating voltage course is set at T, so while the particle is inside D1, moving along its
semicircular orbit in a time T/2, the polarity of the dees is reversed. When the particle reenters the gap, D1 is
positive with respect to D2, and the particle is again accelerated across the gap, thereby gaining a kinetic energy qV.
The particle then enters D2, circulates in a slightly larger circle, and emerges from D2 after spending a time T/2 in
this dee. This process repeats until the orbit of the particle reaches the boundary of the dees. At that point, the
particle (actually, a beam of particles) is extracted from the cyclotron and used for some experimental purpose.
The operation of the cyclotron depends on the fact that, in a uniform magnetic field, a particle’s orbital period is
independent of its radius and its kinetic energy. Consequently, the period of the alternating voltage source need only
be set at the one value given by Equation 11.33. With that setting, the electric field accelerates particles every time
they are between the dees.

Access for free at openstax.org

11.7 • Applications of Magnetic Forces and Fields

If the maximum orbital radius in the cyclotron is R, then from Equation 11.32, the maximum speed of a circulating
particle of mass m and charge q is
11.34

Thus, its kinetic energy when ejected from the cyclotron is
11.35
The maximum kinetic energy attainable with this type of cyclotron is approximately 30 MeV. Above this energy,
relativistic effects become important, which causes the orbital period to increase with the radius. Up to energies of
several hundred MeV, the relativistic effects can be compensated for by making the magnetic field gradually
increase with the radius of the orbit. However, for higher energies, much more elaborate methods must be used to
accelerate particles.
Particles are accelerated to very high energies with either linear accelerators or synchrotrons. The linear accelerator
accelerates particles continuously with the electric field of an electromagnetic wave that travels down a long
evacuated tube. The Stanford Linear Accelerator (SLAC) is about 3.3 km long and accelerates electrons and
positrons (positively charged electrons) to energies of 50 GeV. The synchrotron is constructed so that its bending
magnetic field increases with particle speed in such a way that the particles stay in an orbit of fixed radius. The
world’s highest-energy synchrotron is located at CERN, which is on the Swiss-French border near Geneva. CERN has
been of recent interest with the verified discovery of the Higgs Boson (see Particle Physics and Cosmology
(http://openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-3/pages/11-introduction)). This synchrotron can accelerate
beams of approximately
protons to energies of about
GeV.

EXAMPLE 11.10
Accelerating Alpha-Particles in a Cyclotron
A cyclotron used to accelerate alpha-particles (
) has a radius of 0.50 m
and a magnetic field of 1.8 T. (a) What is the period of revolution of the alpha-particles? (b) What is their maximum
kinetic energy?
Strategy
a. The period of revolution is approximately the distance traveled in a circle divided by the speed. Identifying
that the magnetic force applied is the centripetal force, we can derive the period formula.
b. The kinetic energy can be found from the maximum speed of the beam, corresponding to the maximum radius
within the cyclotron.
Solution
a. By identifying the mass, charge, and magnetic field in the problem, we can calculate the period:

b. By identifying the charge, magnetic field, radius of path, and the mass, we can calculate the maximum kinetic
energy:

487

488

11 • Magnetic Forces and Fields

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 11.6
A cyclotron is to be designed to accelerate protons to kinetic energies of 20 MeV using a magnetic field of 2.0 T.
What is the required radius of the cyclotron?

Access for free at openstax.org

