15.6 • Transformers

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 15.8
The resonant angular frequency of an RLC series circuit is
An ac source operating at this frequency
transfers an average power of
to the circuit. The resistance of the circuit is
Write an
expression for the emf of the source.

15.6 Transformers
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain why power plants transmit electricity at high voltages and low currents and how they do this
• Develop relationships among current, voltage, and the number of windings in step-up and step-down
transformers
Although ac electric power is produced at relatively low voltages, it is sent through transmission lines at very high
voltages (as high as 500 kV). The same power can be transmitted at different voltages because power is the product
(For simplicity, we ignore the phase factor
A particular power requirement can therefore be met
with a low voltage and a high current or with a high voltage and a low current. The advantage of the high-voltage/
low-current choice is that it results in lower
ohmic losses in the transmission lines, which can be significant in
lines that are many kilometers long (Figure 15.20).

FIGURE 15.20 The rms voltage from a power plant eventually needs to be stepped down from 12 kV to 240 V so that it can be safely
introduced into a home. A high-voltage transmission line allows a low current to be transmitted via a substation over long distances.

Typically, the alternating emfs produced at power plants are “stepped up” to very high voltages before being
transmitted through power lines; then, they must be “stepped down” to relatively safe values (110 or 220 V rms)
before they are introduced into homes. The device that transforms voltages from one value to another using
induction is the transformer (Figure 15.21).

645

646

15 • Alternating-Current Circuits

FIGURE 15.21 Transformers are used to step down the high voltages in transmission lines to the 110 to 220 V used in homes. (credit:
modification of work by “Fortyseven”/Flickr)

As Figure 15.22 illustrates, a transformer basically consists of two separated coils, or windings, wrapped around a
soft iron core. The primary winding has
loops, or turns, and is connected to an alternating voltage
The
secondary winding has
turns and is connected to a load resistor
We assume the ideal case for which all
magnetic field lines are confined to the core so that the same magnetic flux permeates each turn of both the primary
and the secondary windings. We also neglect energy losses to magnetic hysteresis, to ohmic heating in the
windings, and to ohmic heating of the induced eddy currents in the core. A good transformer can have losses as low
as 1% of the transmitted power, so this is not a bad assumption.

FIGURE 15.22 A step-up transformer (more turns in the secondary winding than in the primary winding). The two windings are wrapped
around a soft iron core.

To analyze the transformer circuit, we first consider the primary winding. The input voltage

Access for free at openstax.org

is equal to the

15.6 • Transformers

potential difference induced across the primary winding. From Faraday’s law, the induced potential difference is
where is the flux through one turn of the primary winding. Thus,

Similarly, the output voltage
delivered to the load resistor must equal the potential difference induced across
the secondary winding. Since the transformer is ideal, the flux through every turn of the secondary winding is also
and

Combining the last two equations, we have
15.20
Hence, with appropriate values for
“stepped down” (
) to

the input voltage
may be “stepped up”
or
the output voltage. This is often abbreviated as the transformer equation,
15.21

which shows that the ratio of the secondary to primary voltages in a transformer equals the ratio of the number of
turns in their windings. For a step-up transformer, which increases voltage and decreases current, this ratio is
greater than one; for a step-down transformer, which decreases voltage and increases current, this ratio is less
than one.
From the law of energy conservation, the power introduced at any instant by
equal to the power dissipated in the resistor of the secondary circuit; thus,

to the primary winding must be

When combined with Equation 15.20, this gives
15.22
If the voltage is stepped up, the current is stepped down, and vice versa.
Finally, we can use

which tells us that the input voltage

, along with Equation 15.20 and Equation 15.22, to obtain

“sees” not a resistance

but rather a resistance

Our analysis has been based on instantaneous values of voltage and current. However, the resulting equations are
not limited to instantaneous values; they hold also for maximum and rms values.

EXAMPLE 15.6
A Step-Down Transformer
A transformer on a utility pole steps the rms voltage down from 12 kV to 240 V. The transmission line resistance is
200 Ω. (a) What is the ratio of the number of secondary turns to the number of primary turns? (b) If the input current
to the transformer is 2.0 A, what is the output current? (c) Determine the power loss in the transmission line. (d)

647

648

15 • Alternating-Current Circuits

Find the power loss if there were no transformer and the output power were kept the same.
Strategy
The number of turns related to the voltages is found from Equation 15.20. The output current is calculated using
Equation 15.22.
Solution
a. Using Equation 15.20 with rms values

and

we have

so the primary winding has 50 times the number of turns in the secondary winding.
b. From Equation 15.22, the output rms current
is found using the transformer equation with current
15.23

such that

c. The power loss in the transmission line is calculated to be
d. If there were no transformer, the power would have to be sent at 240 V to work for these houses, and the
power loss would be
Therefore, when power needs to be transmitted, we want to avoid power loss. Thus, lines are sent with high
voltages and low currents and adjusted with a transformer before power is sent into homes.
Significance
This application of a step-down transformer allows a home that uses 240-V outlets to have 100 A available to draw
upon. This can power many devices in the home.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 15.9
A transformer steps the line voltage down from 110 to 9.0 V so that a current of 0.50 A can be delivered to a
doorbell. (a) What is the ratio of the number of turns in the primary and secondary windings? (b) What is the current
in the primary winding? (c) What is the resistance seen by the 110-V source?

Access for free at openstax.org

15 • Chapter Review

649

Chapter Review
Key Terms
ac current current that fluctuates sinusoidally with
time at a fixed frequency
ac voltage voltage that fluctuates sinusoidally with
time at a fixed frequency
alternating current (ac) flow of electric charge that
periodically reverses direction
average power time average of the instantaneous
power over one cycle
bandwidth range of angular frequencies over which
the average power is greater than one-half the
maximum value of the average power
capacitive reactance opposition of a capacitor to a
change in current
direct current (dc) flow of electric charge in only one
direction
impedance ac analog to resistance in a dc circuit,
which measures the combined effect of resistance,
capacitive reactance, and inductive reactance
inductive reactance opposition of an inductor to a
change in current
phase angle amount by which the voltage and
current are out of phase with each other in a circuit
power factor amount by which the power delivered in

Key Equations
AC voltage
AC current
capacitive reactance
rms voltage
rms current
inductive reactance
Phase angle of an RLC series circuit
AC version of Ohm’s law
Impedance of an RLC series circuit
Average power associated with a circuit element
Average power dissipated by a resistor
Resonant angular frequency of a circuit
Quality factor of a circuit
Quality factor of a circuit in terms of the circuit parameters
Transformer equation with voltage
Transformer equation with current

the circuit is less than the theoretical maximum of
the circuit due to voltage and current being out of
phase
quality factor dimensionless quantity that describes
the sharpness of the peak of the bandwidth; a high
quality factor is a sharp or narrow resonance peak
resonant frequency frequency at which the
amplitude of the current is a maximum and the
circuit would oscillate if not driven by a voltage
source
rms current root mean square of the current
rms voltage root mean square of the voltage
step-down transformer transformer that decreases
voltage and increases current
step-up transformer transformer that increases
voltage and decreases current
transformer device that transforms voltages from
one value to another using induction
transformer equation equation showing that the
ratio of the secondary to primary voltages in a
transformer equals the ratio of the number of turns
in their windings

650

15 • Chapter Review

Summary
15.1 AC Sources
• Direct current (dc) refers to systems in which the
source voltage is constant.
• Alternating current (ac) refers to systems in
which the source voltage varies periodically,
particularly sinusoidally.
• The voltage source of an ac system puts out a
voltage that is calculated from the time, the peak
voltage, and the angular frequency.
• In a simple circuit, the current is found by
dividing the voltage by the resistance. An ac
current is calculated using the peak current
(determined by dividing the peak voltage by the
resistance), the angular frequency, and the time.
15.2 Simple AC Circuits
• For resistors, the current through and the voltage
across are in phase.
• For capacitors, we find that when a sinusoidal
voltage is applied to a capacitor, the voltage
follows the current by one-fourth of a cycle.
Since a capacitor can stop current when fully
charged, it limits current and offers another form
of ac resistance, called capacitive reactance,
which has units of ohms.
• For inductors in ac circuits, we find that when a
sinusoidal voltage is applied to an inductor, the
voltage leads the current by one-fourth of a
cycle.
• The opposition of an inductor to a change in
current is expressed as a type of ac reactance.
This inductive reactance, which has units of
ohms, varies with the frequency of the ac source.
15.3 RLC Series Circuits with AC
• An RLC series circuit is a resistor, capacitor, and
inductor series combination across an ac source.
• The same current flows through each element of
an RLC series circuit at all points in time.
• The counterpart of resistance in a dc circuit is
impedance, which measures the combined effect
of resistors, capacitors, and inductors. The
maximum current is defined by the ac version of
Ohm’s law.
• Impedance has units of ohms and is found using

the resistance, the capacitive reactance, and the
inductive reactance.
15.4 Power in an AC Circuit
• The average ac power is found by multiplying the
rms values of current and voltage.
• Ohm’s law for the rms ac is found by dividing the
rms voltage by the impedance.
• In an ac circuit, there is a phase angle between
the source voltage and the current, which can be
found by dividing the resistance by the
impedance.
• The average power delivered to an RLC circuit is
affected by the phase angle.
• The power factor ranges from –1 to 1.
15.5 Resonance in an AC Circuit
• At the resonant frequency, inductive reactance
equals capacitive reactance.
• The average power versus angular frequency plot
for a RLC circuit has a peak located at the
resonant frequency; the sharpness or width of
the peak is known as the bandwidth.
• The bandwidth is related to a dimensionless
quantity called the quality factor. A high quality
factor value is a sharp or narrow peak.
15.6 Transformers
• Power plants transmit high voltages at low
currents to achieve lower ohmic losses in their
many kilometers of transmission lines.
• Transformers use induction to transform voltages
from one value to another.
• For a transformer, the voltages across the
primary and secondary coils, or windings, are
related by the transformer equation.
• The currents in the primary and secondary
windings are related by the number of primary
and secondary loops, or turns, in the windings of
the transformer.
• A step-up transformer increases voltage and
decreases current, whereas a step-down
transformer decreases voltage and increases
current.

Conceptual Questions
15.1 AC Sources
1. What is the relationship between frequency and
angular frequency?

Access for free at openstax.org

15.2 Simple AC Circuits
2. Explain why at high frequencies a capacitor acts
as an ac short, whereas an inductor acts as an

15 • Chapter Review

open circuit.
15.3 RLC Series Circuits with AC
3. In an RLC series circuit, can the voltage
measured across the capacitor be greater than
the voltage of the source? Answer the same
question for the voltage across the inductor.
15.4 Power in an AC Circuit
4. For what value of the phase angle between the
voltage output of an ac source and the current is
the average power output of the source a
maximum?
5. Discuss the differences between average power
and instantaneous power.
6. The average ac current delivered to a circuit is
zero. Despite this, power is dissipated in the
circuit. Explain.
7. Can the instantaneous power output of an ac
source ever be negative? Can the average power
output be negative?

651

refers to the maximum average power
dissipated in the resistor. How does this
compare with the maximum instantaneous
power dissipated in the resistor?
15.6 Transformers
9. Why do transmission lines operate at very high
voltages while household circuits operate at
fairly small voltages?
10. How can you distinguish the primary winding
from the secondary winding in a step-up
transformer?
11. Battery packs in some electronic devices are
charged using an adapter connected to a wall
socket. Speculate as to the purpose of the
adapter.
12. Will a transformer work if the input is a dc
voltage?
13. Why are the primary and secondary coils of a
transformer wrapped around the same closed
loop of iron?

8. The power rating of a resistor used in ac circuits

Problems
15.1 AC Sources
14. Write an expression for the output voltage of an
ac source that has an amplitude of 12 V and a
frequency of 200 Hz.
15.2 Simple AC Circuits
15. Calculate the reactance of a
capacitor at
(a) 60 Hz, (b) 600 Hz, and (c) 6000 Hz.
16. What is the capacitance of a capacitor whose
reactance is
at 60 Hz?
17. Calculate the reactance of a 5.0-mH inductor at
(a) 60 Hz, (b) 600 Hz, and (c) 6000 Hz.
18. What is the self-inductance of a coil whose
reactance is
at 60 Hz?
19. At what frequency is the reactance of a
capacitor equal to that of a 10-mH inductor?
20. At 1000 Hz, the reactance of a 5.0-mH inductor
is equal to the reactance of a particular
capacitor. What is the capacitance of the
capacitor?
21. A

resistor is connected across the emf
. Write an
expression for the current through the resistor.

22. A
capacitor is connected to an emf given
by
. (a) What is the
reactance of the capacitor? (b) Write an
expression for the current output of the source.
23. A 100-mH inductor is connected across the emf
of the preceding problem. (a) What is the
reactance of the inductor? (b) Write an
expression for the current through the inductor.
15.3 RLC Series Circuits with AC
24. What is the impedance of a series combination
of a
resistor, a
capacitor, and a
capacitor at a frequency of 2.0 kHz?
25. A resistor and capacitor are connected in series
across an ac generator. The emf of the generator
is given by
where
, and
.
(a) What is the impedance of the circuit? (b)
What is the amplitude of the current through the
resistor? (c) Write an expression for the current
through the resistor. (d) Write expressions
representing the voltages across the resistor and
across the capacitor.
26. A resistor and inductor are connected in series
across an ac generator. The emf of the generator

652

15 • Chapter Review

is given by
and

where
also,
and
(a) What is the impedance of the
circuit? (b) What is the amplitude of the current
through the resistor? (c) Write an expression for
the current through the resistor. (d) Write
expressions representing the voltages across
the resistor and across the inductor.
27. In an RLC series circuit, the voltage amplitude
and frequency of the source are 100 V and 500
Hz, respectively, an
and
(a) What is the impedance of
the circuit? (b) What is the amplitude of the
current from the source? (c) If the emf of the
source is given by
,
how does the current vary with time? (d) Repeat
the calculations with C changed to
28. An RLC series circuit with
,
and
is driven by an
ac source whose frequency and voltage
amplitude are 500 Hz and 50 V, respectively. (a)
What is the impedance of the circuit? (b) What is
the amplitude of the current in the circuit? (c)
What is the phase angle between the emf of the
source and the current?
29. For the circuit shown below, what are (a) the
total impedance and (b) the phase angle
between the current and the emf? (c) Write an
expression for

given by
where
and
when connected across (a)
a
capacitor, (b) a 20-mH inductor, and (c)
a
resistor.
32. A 40-mH inductor is connected to a 60-Hz AC
source whose voltage amplitude is 50 V. If an AC
voltmeter is placed across the inductor, what
does it read?
33. For an RLC series circuit, the voltage amplitude
and frequency of the source are 100 V and 500
Hz, respectively;
; and
.
Find the average power dissipated in the resistor
for the following values for the capacitance: (a)
and (b)
34. An ac source of voltage amplitude 10 V delivers
electric energy at a rate of 0.80 W when its
current output is 2.5 A. What is the phase angle
between the emf and the current?
35. An RLC series circuit has an impedance of
and a power factor of 0.50, with the voltage
lagging the current. (a) Should a capacitor or an
inductor be placed in series with the elements to
raise the power factor of the circuit? (b) What is
the value of the reactance across the inductor
that will raise the power factor to unity?
15.5 Resonance in an AC Circuit
36. (a) Calculate the resonant angular frequency of
an RLC series circuit for which
,
, and
(b) If R is changed
to
what happens to the resonant angular
frequency?
37. The resonant frequency of an RLC series circuit
is
If the self-inductance in the
circuit is 5.0 mH, what is the capacitance in the
circuit?
38. (a) What is the resonant frequency of an RLC
series circuit with
,
, and
? (b) What is the impedance of the
circuit at resonance?

15.4 Power in an AC Circuit
30. The emf of an ac source is given by
where
and
Calculate the average power
output of the source if it is connected across (a)
a
capacitor, (b) a 20-mH inductor, and (c)
a
resistor.
31. Calculate the rms currents for an ac source is

Access for free at openstax.org

39. For an RLC series circuit,
,
, and
(a) If an ac
source of variable frequency is connected to the
circuit, at what frequency is maximum power
dissipated in the resistor? (b) What is the quality
factor of the circuit?
40. An ac source of voltage amplitude 100 V and
variable frequency f drives an RLC series circuit
with
,
, and
(a)

15 • Chapter Review

Plot the current through the resistor as a
function of the frequency f. (b) Use the plot to
determine the resonant frequency of the circuit.
41. (a) What is the resonant frequency of a resistor,
capacitor, and inductor connected in series if
, and
? (b) If
this combination is connected to a 100-V source
operating at the resonant frequency, what is the
power output of the source? (c) What is the Q of
the circuit? (d) What is the bandwidth of the
circuit?
42. Suppose a coil has a self-inductance of 20.0 H
and a resistance of
. What (a) capacitance
and (b) resistance must be connected in series
with the coil to produce a circuit that has a
resonant frequency of 100 Hz and a Q of 10?
43. An ac generator is connected to a device whose
internal circuits are not known. We only know
current and voltage outside the device, as shown
below. Based on the information given, what can
you infer about the electrical nature of the
device and its power usage?

653

turns in the primary winding, how many turns
are there in the secondary winding? (b) If a
resistor connected across the secondary winding
draws an rms current of 0.75 A, what is the
current in the primary winding?
45. A step-up transformer connected to a 110-V line
is used to supply a hydrogen-gas discharge tube
with 5.0 kV (rms). The tube dissipates 75 W of
power. (a) What is the ratio of the number of
turns in the secondary winding to the number of
turns in the primary winding? (b) What are the
rms currents in the primary and secondary
windings? (c) What is the effective resistance
seen by the 110-V source?
46. An ac source of emf delivers 5.0 mW of power at
an rms current of 2.0 mA when it is connected to
the primary coil of a transformer. The rms
voltage across the secondary coil is 20 V. (a)
What are the voltage across the primary coil and
the current through the secondary coil? (b) What
is the ratio of secondary to primary turns for the
transformer?
47. A transformer is used to step down 110 V from a
wall socket to 9.0 V for a radio. (a) If the primary
winding has 500 turns, how many turns does the
secondary winding have? (b) If the radio
operates at a current of 500 mA, what is the
current through the primary winding?

15.6 Transformers
44. A step-up transformer is designed so that the
output of its secondary winding is 2000 V (rms)
when the primary winding is connected to a
110-V (rms) line voltage. (a) If there are 100

48. A transformer is used to supply a 12-V model
train with power from a 110-V wall plug. The
train operates at 50 W of power. (a) What is the
rms current in the secondary coil of the
transformer? (b) What is the rms current in the
primary coil? (c) What is the ratio of the number
of primary to secondary turns? (d) What is the
resistance of the train? (e) What is the resistance
seen by the 110-V source?

Additional Problems
49. The emf of an ac source is given by
where
and
Find an expression that
represents the output current of the source if it
is connected across (a) a
capacitor, (b) a
20-mH inductor, and (c) a
resistor.
50. A 700-pF capacitor is connected across an ac
source with a voltage amplitude of 160 V and a
frequency of 20 kHz. (a) Determine the
capacitive reactance of the capacitor and the
amplitude of the output current of the source.

(b) If the frequency is changed to 60 Hz while
keeping the voltage amplitude at 160 V, what
are the capacitive reactance and the current
amplitude?
51. A 20-mH inductor is connected across an AC
source with a variable frequency and a constantvoltage amplitude of 9.0 V. (a) Determine the
reactance of the circuit and the maximum
current through the inductor when the frequency
is set at 20 kHz. (b) Do the same calculations for
a frequency of 60 Hz.

654

15 • Chapter Review

52. A
capacitor is connected across a 60-Hz
ac source whose voltage amplitude is 50 V. (a)
What is the maximum charge on the capacitor?
(b) What is the maximum current into the
capacitor? (c) What is the phase relationship
between the capacitor charge and the current in
the circuit?
53. A 7.0-mH inductor is connected across a 60-Hz
ac source whose voltage amplitude is 50 V. (a)
What is the maximum current through the
inductor? (b) What is the phase relationship
between the current through and the potential
difference across the inductor?
54. What is the impedance of an RLC series circuit at
the resonant frequency?
55. What is the resistance R in the circuit shown
below if the amplitude of the ac through the
inductor is 4.24 A?

56. An ac source of voltage amplitude 100 V and
frequency 1.0 kHz drives an RLC series circuit
with
,
, and
. (a)
Determine the rms current through the circuit.
(b) What are the rms voltages across the three
elements? (c) What is the phase angle between
the emf and the current? (d) What is the power
output of the source? (e) What is the power
dissipated in the resistor?
57. In an RLC series circuit,
, and
is the power output of the source?

,

,
. What

58. A power plant generator produces 100 A at 15
kV (rms). A transformer is used to step up the
transmission line voltage to 150 kV (rms). (a)
What is rms current in the transmission line? (b)
If the resistance per unit length of the line is
what is the power loss per
meter in the line? (c) What would the power loss
per meter be if the line voltage were 15 kV
(rms)?
59. Consider a power plant located 25 km outside a
town delivering 50 MW of power to the town.
The transmission lines are made of aluminum
cables with a
cross-sectional area. Find
the loss of power in the transmission lines if it is
transmitted at (a) 200 kV (rms) and (b) 120 V
(rms).
60. Neon signs require 12-kV for their operation. A
transformer is to be used to change the voltage
from 220-V (rms) ac to 12-kV (rms) ac. What
must the ratio be of turns in the secondary
winding to the turns in the primary winding? (b)
What is the maximum rms current the neon
lamps can draw if the fuse in the primary
winding goes off at 0.5 A? (c) How much power
is used by the neon sign when it is drawing the
maximum current allowed by the fuse in the
primary winding?

Challenge Problems
61. The 335-kV ac electricity from a power
transmission line is fed into the primary winding
of a transformer. The ratio of the number of
turns in the secondary winding to the number in
the primary winding is
. (a) What
voltage is induced in the secondary winding? (b)
What is unreasonable about this result? (c)
Which assumption or premise is responsible?
62. A

resistor and 30-mH inductor are

Access for free at openstax.org

connected in series, as shown below, across a
120-V (rms) ac power source oscillating at
60-Hz frequency. (a) Find the current in the
circuit. (b) Find the voltage drops across the
resistor and inductor. (c) Find the impedance of
the circuit. (d) Find the power dissipated in the
resistor. (e) Find the power dissipated in the
inductor. (f) Find the power produced by the
source.

15 • Chapter Review

655

Use the simplified circuit shown below.

63. A
resistor,
capacitor, and 30-mH
inductor are connected in series with an ac
source of amplitude 10 V and frequency 125 Hz.
(a) What is the impedance of the circuit? (b)
What is the amplitude of the current in the
circuit? (c) What is the phase constant of the
current? Is it leading or lagging the source
voltage? (d) Write voltage drops across the
resistor, capacitor, and inductor and the source
voltage as a function of time. (e) What is the
power factor of the circuit? (f) How much energy
is used by the resistor in 2.5 s?
64. A
resistor,
capacitor, and 2.5-H
inductor are connected in series with an ac
source of amplitude 10 V and variable angular
frequency . (a) What is the value of the
resonance frequency
? (b) What is the
amplitude of the current if
? (c) What is
the phase constant of the current when
? Is it leading or lagging the source
voltage, or is it in phase? (d) Write an equation
for the voltage drop across the resistor as a
function of time when
. (e) What is the
power factor of the circuit when
? (f)
How much energy is used up by the resistor in
2.5 s when
?
65. Find the reactances of the following capacitors
and inductors in ac circuits with the given
frequencies in each case: (a) 2-mH inductor with
a frequency 60-Hz of the ac circuit; (b) 2-mH
inductor with a frequency 600-Hz of the ac
circuit; (c) 20-mH inductor with a frequency
6-Hz of the ac circuit; (d) 20-mH inductor with a
frequency 60-Hz of the ac circuit; (e) 2-mF
capacitor with a frequency 60-Hz of the ac
circuit; and (f) 2-mF capacitor with a frequency
600-Hz of the AC circuit.
66. An output impedance of an audio amplifier has an
impedance of
and has a mismatch with a lowimpedance
loudspeaker. You are asked to insert
an appropriate transformer to match the
impedances. What turns ratio will you use, and why?

67. Show that the SI unit for capacitive reactance is
the ohm. Show that the SI unit for inductive
reactance is also the ohm.
68. A coil with a self-inductance of 16 mH and a
resistance of
is connected to an ac source
whose frequency can be varied. At what
frequency will the voltage across the coil lead
the current through the coil by
69. An RLC series circuit consists of a
resistor,
a
capacitor, and a 120-mH inductor
whose coil has a resistance of
. The source
for the circuit has an rms emf of 240 V at a
frequency of 60 Hz. Calculate the rms voltages
across the (a) resistor, (b) capacitor, and (c)
inductor.
70. An RLC series circuit consists of a
resistor,
an
capacitor, and a 50-mH inductor. A
110-V (rms) source of variable frequency is
connected across the combination. What is the
power output of the source when its frequency is
set to one-half the resonant frequency of the
circuit?
71. Shown below are two circuits that act as crude
high-pass filters. The input voltage to the circuits
is
, and the output voltage is
(a) Show
that for the capacitor circuit,
and for the inductor circuit,
(b) Show that for high frequencies,
but for low frequencies,

656

15 • Chapter Review

and for the inductor circuit,
(b) Show that for low frequencies,
but for high frequencies,

72. The two circuits shown below act as crude lowpass filters. The input voltage to the circuits is
, and the output voltage is
(a) Show that
for the capacitor circuit,

Access for free at openstax.org

CHAPTER 16

Electromagnetic Waves

FIGURE 16.1 The pressure from sunlight predicted by Maxwell’s equations helped produce the tail of Comet McNaught. (credit:
modification of work by Sebastian Deiries—ESO)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
16.1 Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic Waves
16.2 Plane Electromagnetic Waves
16.3 Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves
16.4 Momentum and Radiation Pressure
16.5 The Electromagnetic Spectrum
INTRODUCTION Our view of objects in the sky at night, the warm radiance of sunshine, the sting of sunburn, our
cell phone conversations, and the X-rays revealing a broken bone—all are brought to us by electromagnetic waves. It
would be hard to overstate the practical importance of electromagnetic waves, through their role in vision, through
countless technological applications, and through their ability to transport the energy from the Sun through space to
sustain life and almost all of its activities on Earth.
Theory predicted the general phenomenon of electromagnetic waves before anyone realized that light is a form of
an electromagnetic wave. In the mid-nineteenth century, James Clerk Maxwell formulated a single theory
combining all the electric and magnetic effects known at that time. Maxwell’s equations, summarizing this theory,
predicted the existence of electromagnetic waves that travel at the speed of light. His theory also predicted how
these waves behave, and how they carry both energy and momentum. The tails of comets, such as Comet McNaught
in Figure 16.1, provide a spectacular example. Energy carried by light from the Sun warms the comet to release dust
and gas. The momentum carried by the light exerts a weak force that shapes the dust into a tail of the kind seen
here. The flux of particles emitted by the Sun, called the solar wind, typically produces an additional, second tail, as
described in detail in this chapter.
In this chapter, we explain Maxwell’s theory and show how it leads to his prediction of electromagnetic waves. We
use his theory to examine what electromagnetic waves are, how they are produced, and how they transport energy
and momentum. We conclude by summarizing some of the many practical applications of electromagnetic waves.

658

16 • Electromagnetic Waves

16.1 Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic Waves
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain Maxwell’s correction of Ampère’s law by including the displacement current
• State and apply Maxwell’s equations in integral form
• Describe how the symmetry between changing electric and changing magnetic fields explains Maxwell’s
prediction of electromagnetic waves
• Describe how Hertz confirmed Maxwell’s prediction of electromagnetic waves
James Clerk Maxwell (1831–1879) was one of the major contributors to physics in the nineteenth century (Figure
16.2). Although he died young, he made major contributions to the development of the kinetic theory of gases, to
the understanding of color vision, and to the nature of Saturn’s rings. He is probably best known for having combined
existing knowledge of the laws of electricity and of magnetism with insights of his own into a complete overarching
electromagnetic theory, represented by Maxwell’s equations.

FIGURE 16.2 James Clerk Maxwell, a nineteenth-century physicist, developed a theory that explained the relationship between electricity
and magnetism, and correctly predicted that visible light consists of electromagnetic waves.

Maxwell’s Correction to the Laws of Electricity and Magnetism
The four basic laws of electricity and magnetism had been discovered experimentally through the work of physicists
such as Oersted, Coulomb, Gauss, and Faraday. Maxwell discovered logical inconsistencies in these earlier results
and identified the incompleteness of Ampère’s law as their cause.
Recall that according to Ampère’s law, the integral of the magnetic field around a closed loop C is proportional to the
current I passing through any surface whose boundary is loop C itself:
16.1
There are infinitely many surfaces that can be attached to any loop, and Ampère’s law stated in Equation 16.1 is
independent of the choice of surface.
Consider the set-up in Figure 16.3. A source of emf is abruptly connected across a parallel-plate capacitor so that a
time-dependent current I develops in the wire. Suppose we apply Ampère’s law to loop C shown at a time before the
capacitor is fully charged, so that
. Surface
gives a nonzero value for the enclosed current I, whereas
surface
gives zero for the enclosed current because no current passes through it:

Access for free at openstax.org

16.1 • Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic Waves

Clearly, Ampère’s law in its usual form does not work here. This is an internal contradiction in the theory which
requires a modification to the theory, Ampère’s law, itself.

FIGURE 16.3 The currents through surface

and surface

are unequal, despite having the same boundary loop C.

How can Ampère’s law be modified so that it works in all situations? Maxwell suggested including an additional
contribution, called the displacement current , to the real current I,
16.2
where the displacement current is defined to be
16.3

Here

is the permittivity of free space and

is the electric flux, defined as

The displacement current is analogous to a real current in Ampère’s law, entering into Ampère’s law in the same
way. It is produced, however, by a changing electric field. It accounts for a changing electric field producing a
magnetic field, just as a real current does, but the displacement current can produce a magnetic field even where no
real current is present. When this extra term is included, the modified Ampère’s law equation becomes
16.4
and is independent of the surface S through which the current I is measured.
We can now examine this modified version of Ampère’s law to confirm that it holds independent of whether the
surface

or the surface

in Figure 16.3 is chosen. The electric field

16.3 is between the capacitor plates. Therefore, the
are both zero, and Equation 16.2 takes the form

corresponding to the flux

in Equation

field and the displacement current through the surface
16.5

We must now show that for surface

through which no actual current flows, the displacement current leads to

659

660

16 • Electromagnetic Waves

the same value

for the right side of the Ampère’s law equation. For surface

the equation becomes
16.6

Gauss’s law for electric charge requires a closed surface and cannot ordinarily be applied to a surface like
alone
or
alone. But the two surfaces
and
form a closed surface in Figure 16.3 and can be used in Gauss’s law.
Because the electric field is zero on
, the flux contribution through
is zero. This gives us

Therefore, we can replace the integral over
apply Gauss’s law to obtain

in Equation 16.6 with the closed Gaussian surface

and
16.7

Thus, the modified Ampère’s law equation is the same using surface
where the right-hand side results from the
displacement current, as it is for the surface
where the contribution comes from the actual flow of electric
charge.

EXAMPLE 16.1
Displacement current in a charging capacitor
A parallel-plate capacitor with capacitance C whose plates have area A and separation distance d is connected to a
resistor R and a battery of voltage V. The current starts to flow at
. (a) Find the displacement current between
the capacitor plates at time t. (b) From the properties of the capacitor, find the corresponding real current

,

and compare the answer to the expected current in the wires of the corresponding RC circuit.
Strategy
We can use the equations from the analysis of an RC circuit (Alternating-Current Circuits) plus Maxwell’s version of
Ampère’s law.
Solution
a. The voltage between the plates at time t is given by

Let the z-axis point from the positive plate to the negative plate. Then the z-component of the electric field
between the plates as a function of time t is

Therefore, the z-component of the displacement current

where we have used
b. From the expression for

Access for free at openstax.org

for the capacitance.
the charge on the capacitor is

between the plates is

16.1 • Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic Waves

The current into the capacitor after the circuit is closed, is therefore

This current is the same as

found in (a).

Maxwell’s Equations
With the correction for the displacement current, Maxwell’s equations take the form
16.8
16.9
16.10
16.11

Once the fields have been calculated using these four equations, the Lorentz force equation
16.12
gives the force that the fields exert on a particle with charge q moving with velocity . The Lorentz force equation
combines the force of the electric field and of the magnetic field on the moving charge. The magnetic and electric
forces have been examined in earlier modules. These four Maxwell’s equations are, respectively,

MAXWELL’S EQUATIONS
1. Gauss’s law
The electric flux through any closed surface is equal to the electric charge
enclosed by the surface. Gauss’s
law [Equation 16.8] describes the relation between an electric charge and the electric field it produces. This is
often pictured in terms of electric field lines originating from positive charges and terminating on negative
charges, and indicating the direction of the electric field at each point in space.
2. Gauss’s law for magnetism
The magnetic field flux through any closed surface is zero [Equation 16.9]. This is equivalent to the statement
that magnetic field lines are continuous, having no beginning or end. Any magnetic field line entering the region
enclosed by the surface must also leave it. No magnetic monopoles, where magnetic field lines would terminate,
are known to exist (see Magnetic Fields and Lines).
3. Faraday’s law
A changing magnetic field induces an electromotive force (emf) and, hence, an electric field. The direction of the
emf opposes the change. This third of Maxwell’s equations, Equation 16.10, is Faraday’s law of induction and
includes Lenz’s law. The electric field from a changing magnetic field has field lines that form closed loops,
without any beginning or end.
4. Ampère-Maxwell law
Magnetic fields are generated by moving charges or by changing electric fields. This fourth of Maxwell’s
equations, Equation 16.11, encompasses Ampère’s law and adds another source of magnetic fields, namely
changing electric fields.
Maxwell’s equations and the Lorentz force law together encompass all the laws of electricity and magnetism. The

661

662

16 • Electromagnetic Waves

symmetry that Maxwell introduced into his mathematical framework may not be immediately apparent. Faraday’s
law describes how changing magnetic fields produce electric fields. The displacement current introduced by
Maxwell results instead from a changing electric field and accounts for a changing electric field producing a
magnetic field. The equations for the effects of both changing electric fields and changing magnetic fields differ in
form only where the absence of magnetic monopoles leads to missing terms. This symmetry between the effects of
changing magnetic and electric fields is essential in explaining the nature of electromagnetic waves.
Later application of Einstein’s theory of relativity to Maxwell’s complete and symmetric theory showed that electric
and magnetic forces are not separate but are different manifestations of the same thing—the electromagnetic force.
The electromagnetic force and weak nuclear force are similarly unified as the electroweak force. This unification of
forces has been one motivation for attempts to unify all of the four basic forces in nature—the gravitational,
electrical, strong, and weak nuclear forces (see Particle Physics and Cosmology (http://openstax.org/books/
university-physics-volume-3/pages/11-introduction)).

The Mechanism of Electromagnetic Wave Propagation
To see how the symmetry introduced by Maxwell accounts for the existence of combined electric and magnetic
waves that propagate through space, imagine a time-varying magnetic field
alternating current seen in Figure 16.4. We represent

produced by the high-frequency

in the diagram by one of its field lines. From Faraday’s

law, the changing magnetic field through a surface induces a time-varying electric field
at the boundary of
that surface. The displacement current source for the electric field, like the Faraday’s law source for the magnetic
field, produces only closed loops of field lines, because of the mathematical symmetry involved in the equations for
the induced electric and induced magnetic fields. A field line representation of
electric field

creates a magnetic field

is shown. In turn, the changing

according to the modified Ampère’s law. This changing field

induces
which induces
and so on. We then have a self-continuing process that leads to the creation
of time-varying electric and magnetic fields in regions farther and farther away from O. This process may be
visualized as the propagation of an electromagnetic wave through space.

FIGURE 16.4 How changing

and

fields propagate through space.

In the next section, we show in more precise mathematical terms how Maxwell’s equations lead to the prediction of
electromagnetic waves that can travel through space without a material medium, implying a speed of
electromagnetic waves equal to the speed of light.
Prior to Maxwell’s work, experiments had already indicated that light was a wave phenomenon, although the nature
of the waves was yet unknown. In 1801, Thomas Young (1773–1829) showed that when a light beam was
separated by two narrow slits and then recombined, a pattern made up of bright and dark fringes was formed on a
screen. Young explained this behavior by assuming that light was composed of waves that added constructively at
some points and destructively at others (see Interference (http://openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-3/
pages/3-introduction)). Subsequently, Jean Foucault (1819–1868), with measurements of the speed of light in
various media, and Augustin Fresnel (1788–1827), with detailed experiments involving interference and diffraction
of light, provided further conclusive evidence that light was a wave. So, light was known to be a wave, and Maxwell
had predicted the existence of electromagnetic waves that traveled at the speed of light. The conclusion seemed
inescapable: Light must be a form of electromagnetic radiation. But Maxwell’s theory showed that other
wavelengths and frequencies than those of light were possible for electromagnetic waves. He showed that
electromagnetic radiation with the same fundamental properties as visible light should exist at any frequency. It

Access for free at openstax.org

16.1 • Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic Waves

remained for others to test, and confirm, this prediction.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 16.1
When the emf across a capacitor is turned on and the capacitor is allowed to charge, when does the magnetic field
induced by the displacement current have the greatest magnitude?

Hertz’s Observations
The German physicist Heinrich Hertz (1857–1894) was the first to generate and detect certain types of
electromagnetic waves in the laboratory. Starting in 1887, he performed a series of experiments that not only
confirmed the existence of electromagnetic waves but also verified that they travel at the speed of light.
Hertz used an alternating-current RLC (resistor-inductor-capacitor) circuit that resonates at a known frequency
and connected it to a loop of wire, as shown in Figure 16.5. High voltages induced across the gap in
the loop produced sparks that were visible evidence of the current in the circuit and helped generate
electromagnetic waves.
Across the laboratory, Hertz placed another loop attached to another RLC circuit, which could be tuned (as the dial
on a radio) to the same resonant frequency as the first and could thus be made to receive electromagnetic waves.
This loop also had a gap across which sparks were generated, giving solid evidence that electromagnetic waves had
been received.

FIGURE 16.5 The apparatus used by Hertz in 1887 to generate and detect electromagnetic waves.

Hertz also studied the reflection, refraction, and interference patterns of the electromagnetic waves he generated,
confirming their wave character. He was able to determine the wavelengths from the interference patterns, and
knowing their frequencies, he could calculate the propagation speed using the equation
, where v is the
speed of a wave, f is its frequency, and is its wavelength. Hertz was thus able to prove that electromagnetic waves
travel at the speed of light. The SI unit for frequency, the hertz (
), is named in his honor.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 16.2
Could a purely electric field propagate as a wave through a vacuum without a magnetic field? Justify your answer.

663

664

16 • Electromagnetic Waves

16.2 Plane Electromagnetic Waves
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe how Maxwell’s equations predict the relative directions of the electric fields and magnetic fields,
and the direction of propagation of plane electromagnetic waves
• Explain how Maxwell’s equations predict that the speed of propagation of electromagnetic waves in free
space is exactly the speed of light
• Calculate the relative magnitude of the electric and magnetic fields in an electromagnetic plane wave
• Describe how electromagnetic waves are produced and detected
Mechanical waves travel through a medium such as a string, water, or air. Perhaps the most significant prediction of
Maxwell’s equations is the existence of combined electric and magnetic (or electromagnetic) fields that propagate
through space as electromagnetic waves. Because Maxwell’s equations hold in free space, the predicted
electromagnetic waves, unlike mechanical waves, do not require a medium for their propagation.
A general treatment of the physics of electromagnetic waves is beyond the scope of this textbook. We can, however,
investigate the special case of an electromagnetic wave that propagates through free space along the x-axis of a
given coordinate system.

Electromagnetic Waves in One Direction
An electromagnetic wave consists of an electric field, defined as usual in terms of the force per charge on a
stationary charge, and a magnetic field, defined in terms of the force per charge on a moving charge. The
electromagnetic field is assumed to be a function of only the x-coordinate and time. The y-component of the electric
field is then written as
the z-component of the magnetic field as
, etc. Because we are assuming
free space, there are no free charges or currents, so we can set
and
in Maxwell’s equations.
The transverse nature of electromagnetic waves
We examine first what Gauss’s law for electric fields implies about the relative directions of the electric field and the
propagation direction in an electromagnetic wave. Assume the Gaussian surface to be the surface of a rectangular
box whose cross-section is a square of side l and whose third side has length
, as shown in Figure 16.6. Because
the electric field is a function only of x and t, the y-component of the electric field is the same on both the top
(labeled Side 2) and bottom (labeled Side 1) of the box, so that these two contributions to the flux cancel. The
corresponding argument also holds for the net flux from the z-component of the electric field through Sides 3 and 4.
Any net flux through the surface therefore comes entirely from the x-component of the electric field. Because the
electric field has no y- or z-dependence,
is constant over the face of the box with area A and has a possibly
different value
that is constant over the opposite face of the box. Applying Gauss’s law gives
16.13
where

is the area of the front and back faces of the rectangular surface. But the charge enclosed is
, so this component’s net flux is also zero, and Equation 16.13 implies
for any
. Therefore, if there is an x-component of the electric field, it cannot vary with x. A uniform field of that kind
would merely be superposed artificially on the traveling wave, for example, by having a pair of parallel-charged
plates. Such a component
would not be part of an electromagnetic wave propagating along the x-axis; so
for this wave. Therefore, the only nonzero components of the electric field are
and
perpendicular to the direction of propagation of the wave.

Access for free at openstax.org

16.2 • Plane Electromagnetic Waves

FIGURE 16.6 The surface of a rectangular box of dimensions
electromagnetic wave propagating along the x-axis.

is our Gaussian surface. The electric field shown is from an

A similar argument holds by substituting E for B and using Gauss’s law for magnetism instead of Gauss’s law for
electric fields. This shows that the B field is also perpendicular to the direction of propagation of the wave. The
electromagnetic wave is therefore a transverse wave, with its oscillating electric and magnetic fields perpendicular
to its direction of propagation.
The speed of propagation of electromagnetic waves
We can next apply Maxwell’s equations to the description given in connection with Figure 16.4 in the previous
section to obtain an equation for the E field from the changing B field, and for the B field from a changing E field. We
then combine the two equations to show how the changing E and B fields propagate through space at a speed
precisely equal to the speed of light.
First, we apply Faraday’s law over Side 3 of the Gaussian surface, using the path shown in Figure 16.7. Because
we have

Assuming

we obtain

is small and approximating

by

665

666

16 • Electromagnetic Waves

FIGURE 16.7 We apply Faraday’s law to the front of the rectangle by evaluating

along the rectangular edge of Side 3 in the

direction indicated, taking the B field crossing the face to be approximately its value in the middle of the area traversed.

Because
is small, the magnetic flux through the face can be approximated by its value in the center of the area
traversed, namely
. The flux of the B field through Face 3 is then the B field times the area,
16.14
From Faraday’s law,
16.15
Therefore, from Equation 16.13 and Equation 16.14,

Canceling

and taking the limit as

, we are left with
16.16

We could have applied Faraday’s law instead to the top surface (numbered 2) in Figure 16.7, to obtain the resulting
equation
16.17
This is the equation describing the spatially dependent E field produced by the time-dependent B field.
Next we apply the Ampère-Maxwell law (with
) over the same two faces (Surface 3 and then Surface 2) of the
rectangular box of Figure 16.7. Applying Equation 16.10,

Access for free at openstax.org

16.2 • Plane Electromagnetic Waves

to Surface 3, and then to Surface 2, yields the two equations
16.18
16.19
These equations describe the spatially dependent B field produced by the time-dependent E field.
We next combine the equations showing the changing B field producing an E field with the equation showing the
changing E field producing a B field. Taking the derivative of Equation 16.16 with respect to x and using Equation
16.19 gives

16.20

This is the form taken by the general wave equation for our plane wave. Because the equations describe a wave
traveling at some as-yet-unspecified speed c, we can assume the field components are each functions of x – ct for
the wave traveling in the +x-direction, that is,
16.21
It is left as a mathematical exercise to show, using the chain rule for differentiation, that Equation 16.17 and
Equation 16.18 imply

The speed of the electromagnetic wave in free space is therefore given in terms of the permeability and the
permittivity of free space by
16.22

We could just as easily have assumed an electromagnetic wave with field components
and
same type of analysis with Equation 16.25 and Equation 16.24 would also show that the speed of an
electromagnetic wave is
.

. The

The physics of traveling electromagnetic fields was worked out by Maxwell in 1873. He showed in a more general
way than our derivation that electromagnetic waves always travel in free space with a speed given by Equation
16.18. If we evaluate the speed
we find that

which is the speed of light. Imagine the excitement that Maxwell must have felt when he discovered this equation!
He had found a fundamental connection between two seemingly unrelated phenomena: electromagnetic fields and
light.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 16.3
The wave equation was obtained by (1) finding the E field produced by the changing B field, (2) finding the B field

667

668

16 • Electromagnetic Waves

produced by the changing E field, and combining the two results. Which of Maxwell’s equations was the basis of step
(1) and which of step (2)?

How the E and B Fields Are Related
So far, we have seen that the rates of change of different components of the E and B fields are related, that the
electromagnetic wave is transverse, and that the wave propagates at speed c. We next show what Maxwell’s
equations imply about the ratio of the E and B field magnitudes and the relative directions of the E and B fields.
We now consider solutions to Equation 16.16 in the form of plane waves for the electric field:
16.23
We have arbitrarily taken the wave to be traveling in the +x-direction and chosen its phase so that the maximum
field strength occurs at the origin at time
. We are justified in considering only sines and cosines in this way,
and generalizing the results, because Fourier’s theorem implies we can express any wave, including even square
step functions, as a superposition of sines and cosines.
At any one specific point in space, the E field oscillates sinusoidally at angular frequency between
and
and similarly, the B field oscillates between
and
The amplitude of the wave is the maximum value of
The period of oscillation T is the time required for a complete oscillation. The frequency f is the number of
complete oscillations per unit of time, and is related to the angular frequency by
. The wavelength is
the distance covered by one complete cycle of the wave, and the wavenumber k is the number of wavelengths that
fit into a distance of
in the units being used. These quantities are related in the same way as for a mechanical
wave:

Given that the solution of
has the form shown in Equation 16.20, we need to determine the B field that
accompanies it. From Equation 16.24, the magnetic field component
must obey
16.24

Because the solution for the B-field pattern of the wave propagates in the +x-direction at the same speed c as the
E-field pattern, it must be a function of
. Thus, we conclude from Equation 16.21 that
is

These results may be written as
16.25

16.26

Therefore, the peaks of the E and B fields coincide, as do the troughs of the wave, and at each point, the E and B
fields are in the same ratio equal to the speed of light c. The plane wave has the form shown in Figure 16.8.

Access for free at openstax.org

16.2 • Plane Electromagnetic Waves

FIGURE 16.8 The plane wave solution of Maxwell’s equations has the B field directly proportional to the E field at each point, with the
relative directions shown.

EXAMPLE 16.2
Calculating B-Field Strength in an Electromagnetic Wave
What is the maximum strength of the B field in an electromagnetic wave that has a maximum E-field strength of
1000 V/m?
Strategy
To find the B-field strength, we rearrange Equation 16.23 to solve for B, yielding

Solution
We are given E, and c is the speed of light. Entering these into the expression for B yields

Significance
The B-field strength is less than a tenth of Earth’s admittedly weak magnetic field. This means that a relatively
strong electric field of 1000 V/m is accompanied by a relatively weak magnetic field.
Changing electric fields create relatively weak magnetic fields. The combined electric and magnetic fields can be
detected in electromagnetic waves, however, by taking advantage of the phenomenon of resonance, as Hertz did. A
system with the same natural frequency as the electromagnetic wave can be made to oscillate. All radio and TV
receivers use this principle to pick up and then amplify weak electromagnetic waves, while rejecting all others not at
their resonant frequency.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 16.4
What conclusions did our analysis of Maxwell’s equations lead to about these properties of a plane electromagnetic
wave:
(a) the relative directions of wave propagation, of the E field, and of B field,
(b) the speed of travel of the wave and how the speed depends on frequency, and
(c) the relative magnitudes of the E and B fields.

Production and Detection of Electromagnetic Waves
A steady electric current produces a magnetic field that is constant in time and which does not propagate as a wave.

669

670

16 • Electromagnetic Waves

Accelerating charges, however, produce electromagnetic waves. An electric charge oscillating up and down, or an
alternating current or flow of charge in a conductor, emit radiation at the frequencies of their oscillations. The
electromagnetic field of a dipole antenna is shown in Figure 16.9. The positive and negative charges on the two
conductors are made to reverse at the desired frequency by the output of a transmitter as the power source. The
continually changing current accelerates charge in the antenna, and this results in an oscillating electric field a
distance away from the antenna. The changing electric fields produce changing magnetic fields that in turn produce
changing electric fields, which thereby propagate as electromagnetic waves. The frequency of this radiation is the
same as the frequency of the ac source that is accelerating the electrons in the antenna. The two conducting
elements of the dipole antenna are commonly straight wires. The total length of the two wires is typically about onehalf of the desired wavelength (hence, the alternative name half-wave antenna), because this allows standing waves
to be set up and enhances the effectiveness of the radiation.

FIGURE 16.9 The oscillatory motion of the charges in a dipole antenna produces electromagnetic radiation.

The electric field lines in one plane are shown. The magnetic field is perpendicular to this plane. This radiation field
has cylindrical symmetry around the axis of the dipole. Field lines near the dipole are not shown. The pattern is not
at all uniform in all directions. The strongest signal is in directions perpendicular to the axis of the antenna, which
would be horizontal if the antenna is mounted vertically. There is zero intensity along the axis of the antenna. The
fields detected far from the antenna are from the changing electric and magnetic fields inducing each other and
traveling as electromagnetic waves. Far from the antenna, the wave fronts, or surfaces of equal phase for the
electromagnetic wave, are almost spherical. Even farther from the antenna, the radiation propagates like
electromagnetic plane waves.
The electromagnetic waves carry energy away from their source, similar to a sound wave carrying energy away from
a standing wave on a guitar string. An antenna for receiving electromagnetic signals works in reverse. Incoming
electromagnetic waves induce oscillating currents in the antenna, each at its own frequency. The radio receiver
includes a tuner circuit, whose resonant frequency can be adjusted. The tuner responds strongly to the desired
frequency but not others, allowing the user to tune to the desired broadcast. Electrical components amplify the
signal formed by the moving electrons. The signal is then converted into an audio and/or video format.

INTERACTIVE
Use this simulation (https://openstax.org/l/21radwavsim) to broadcast radio waves. Wiggle the transmitter electron
manually or have it oscillate automatically. Display the field as a curve or vectors. The strip chart shows the electron
positions at the transmitter and at the receiver.

Access for free at openstax.org

16.3 • Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves

16.3 Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Express the time-averaged energy density of electromagnetic waves in terms of their electric and
magnetic field amplitudes
• Calculate the Poynting vector and the energy intensity of electromagnetic waves
• Explain how the energy of an electromagnetic wave depends on its amplitude, whereas the energy of a
photon is proportional to its frequency
Anyone who has used a microwave oven knows there is energy in electromagnetic waves. Sometimes this energy is
obvious, such as in the warmth of the summer Sun. Other times, it is subtle, such as the unfelt energy of gamma
rays, which can destroy living cells.
Electromagnetic waves bring energy into a system by virtue of their electric and magnetic fields. These fields can
exert forces and move charges in the system and, thus, do work on them. However, there is energy in an
electromagnetic wave itself, whether it is absorbed or not. Once created, the fields carry energy away from a source.
If some energy is later absorbed, the field strengths are diminished and anything left travels on.
Clearly, the larger the strength of the electric and magnetic fields, the more work they can do and the greater the
energy the electromagnetic wave carries. In electromagnetic waves, the amplitude is the maximum field strength of
the electric and magnetic fields (Figure 16.10). The wave energy is determined by the wave amplitude.

FIGURE 16.10 Energy carried by a wave depends on its amplitude. With electromagnetic waves, doubling the E fields and B fields
quadruples the energy density u and the energy flux uc.

For a plane wave traveling in the direction of the positive x-axis with the phase of the wave chosen so that the wave
maximum is at the origin at
, the electric and magnetic fields obey the equations

The energy in any part of the electromagnetic wave is the sum of the energies of the electric and magnetic fields.
This energy per unit volume, or energy density u, is the sum of the energy density from the electric field and the
energy density from the magnetic field. Expressions for both field energy densities were discussed earlier (
in
Capacitance and
in Inductance). Combining these the contributions, we obtain

The expression

then shows that the magnetic energy density

and electric energy density

are equal, despite the fact that changing electric fields generally produce only small magnetic fields. The equality of

671

672

16 • Electromagnetic Waves

the electric and magnetic energy densities leads to
16.27
The energy density moves with the electric and magnetic fields in a similar manner to the waves themselves.
We can find the rate of transport of energy by considering a small time interval . As shown in Figure 16.11, the
energy contained in a cylinder of length
and cross-sectional area A passes through the cross-sectional plane in
the interval

FIGURE 16.11 The energy
through the area A in time

.

contained in the electric and magnetic fields of the electromagnetic wave in the volume

The energy passing through area A in time

passes

is

The energy per unit area per unit time passing through a plane perpendicular to the wave, called the energy flux and
denoted by S, can be calculated by dividing the energy by the area A and the time interval .

More generally, the flux of energy through any surface also depends on the orientation of the surface. To take the
direction into account, we introduce a vector , called the Poynting vector, with the following definition:
16.28

The cross-product of and points in the direction perpendicular to both vectors. To confirm that the direction of
is that of wave propagation, and not its negative, return to Figure 16.7. Note that Lenz’s and Faraday’s laws imply
that when the magnetic field shown is increasing in time, the electric field is greater at x than at
. The electric
field is decreasing with increasing x at the given time and location. The proportionality between electric and
magnetic fields requires the electric field to increase in time along with the magnetic field. This is possible only if the
wave is propagating to the right in the diagram, in which case, the relative orientations show that

is

specifically in the direction of propagation of the electromagnetic wave.
The energy flux at any place also varies in time, as can be seen by substituting u from Equation 16.23 into Equation
16.27.
16.29
Because the frequency of visible light is very high, of the order of
the energy flux for visible light through
any area is an extremely rapidly varying quantity. Most measuring devices, including our eyes, detect only an
average over many cycles. The time average of the energy flux is the intensity I of the electromagnetic wave and is
the power per unit area. It can be expressed by averaging the cosine function in Equation 16.29 over one complete
cycle, which is the same as time-averaging over many cycles (here, T is one period):

Access for free at openstax.org

16.3 • Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves

16.30

We can either evaluate the integral, or else note that because the sine and cosine differ merely in phase, the average
over a complete cycle for
is the same as for
, to obtain

where the angle brackets
vacuum is then found to be

stand for the time-averaging operation. The intensity of light moving at speed c in

16.31

in terms of the maximum electric field strength
manipulation produces the relationship

which is also the electric field amplitude. Algebraic

16.32

where
is the magnetic field amplitude, which is the same as the maximum magnetic field strength. One more
expression for
in terms of both electric and magnetic field strengths is useful. Substituting the fact that
the previous expression becomes
16.33

We can use whichever of the three preceding equations is most convenient, because the three equations are really
just different versions of the same result: The energy in a wave is related to amplitude squared. Furthermore,
because these equations are based on the assumption that the electromagnetic waves are sinusoidal, the peak
intensity is twice the average intensity; that is,

EXAMPLE 16.3
A Laser Beam
The beam from a small laboratory laser typically has an intensity of about
. Assuming that the
beam is composed of plane waves, calculate the amplitudes of the electric and magnetic fields in the beam.
Strategy
Use the equation expressing intensity in terms of electric field to calculate the electric field from the intensity.
Solution
From Equation 16.31, the intensity of the laser beam is

The amplitude of the electric field is therefore

The amplitude of the magnetic field can be obtained from Equation 16.20:

673

674

16 • Electromagnetic Waves

EXAMPLE 16.4
Light Bulb Fields
A light bulb emits 5.00 W of power as visible light. What are the average electric and magnetic fields from the light at
a distance of 3.0 m?
Strategy
Assume the bulb’s power output P is distributed uniformly over a sphere of radius 3.0 m to calculate the intensity,
and from it, the electric field.

Solution
The power radiated as visible light is then

Significance
The intensity I falls off as the distance squared if the radiation is dispersed uniformly in all directions.

EXAMPLE 16.5
Radio Range
A 60-kW radio transmitter on Earth sends its signal to a satellite 100 km away (Figure 16.12). At what distance in
the same direction would the signal have the same maximum field strength if the transmitter’s output power were
increased to 90 kW?

Access for free at openstax.org

16.4 • Momentum and Radiation Pressure

FIGURE 16.12 In three dimensions, a signal spreads over a solid angle as it travels outward from its source.

Strategy
The area over which the power in a particular direction is dispersed increases as distance squared, as illustrated in
the figure. Change the power output P by a factor of (90 kW/60 kW) and change the area by the same factor to keep
the same. Then use the proportion of area A in the diagram to distance squared to find the
distance that produces the calculated change in area.
Solution
Using the proportionality of the areas to the squares of the distances, and solving, we obtain from the diagram

Significance
The range of a radio signal is the maximum distance between the transmitter and receiver that allows for normal
operation. In the absence of complications such as reflections from obstacles, the intensity follows an inverse
square law, and doubling the range would require multiplying the power by four.

16.4 Momentum and Radiation Pressure
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the relationship of the radiation pressure and the energy density of an electromagnetic wave
• Explain how the radiation pressure of light, while small, can produce observable astronomical effects
Material objects consist of charged particles. An electromagnetic wave incident on the object exerts forces on the
charged particles, in accordance with the Lorentz force, Equation 16.11. These forces do work on the particles of the
object, increasing its energy, as discussed in the previous section. The energy that sunlight carries is a familiar part
of every warm sunny day. A much less familiar feature of electromagnetic radiation is the extremely weak pressure
that electromagnetic radiation produces by exerting a force in the direction of the wave. This force occurs because
electromagnetic waves contain and transport momentum.
To understand the direction of the force for a very specific case, consider a plane electromagnetic wave incident on
a metal in which electron motion, as part of a current, is damped by the resistance of the metal, so that the average

675

676

16 • Electromagnetic Waves

electron motion is in phase with the force causing it. This is comparable to an object moving against friction and
stopping as soon as the force pushing it stops (Figure 16.13). When the electric field is in the direction of the
positive y-axis, electrons move in the negative y-direction, with the magnetic field in the direction of the positive
z-axis. By applying the right-hand rule, and accounting for the negative charge of the electron, we can see that the
force on the electron from the magnetic field is in the direction of the positive x-axis, which is the direction of wave
propagation. When the E field reverses, the B field does too, and the force is again in the same direction. Maxwell’s
equations together with the Lorentz force equation imply the existence of radiation pressure much more generally
than this specific example, however.

FIGURE 16.13 Electric and magnetic fields of an electromagnetic wave can combine to produce a force in the direction of propagation, as
illustrated for the special case of electrons whose motion is highly damped by the resistance of a metal.

Maxwell predicted that an electromagnetic wave carries momentum. An object absorbing an electromagnetic wave
would experience a force in the direction of propagation of the wave. The force corresponds to radiation pressure
exerted on the object by the wave. The force would be twice as great if the radiation were reflected rather than
absorbed.
Maxwell’s prediction was confirmed in 1903 by Nichols and Hull by precisely measuring radiation pressures with a
torsion balance. The schematic arrangement is shown in Figure 16.14. The mirrors suspended from a fiber were
housed inside a glass container. Nichols and Hull were able to obtain a small measurable deflection of the mirrors
from shining light on one of them. From the measured deflection, they could calculate the unbalanced force on the
mirror, and obtained agreement with the predicted value of the force.

FIGURE 16.14 Simplified diagram of the central part of the apparatus Nichols and Hull used to precisely measure radiation pressure and
confirm Maxwell’s prediction.

The radiation pressure
applied by an electromagnetic wave on a perfectly absorbing surface turns out to be
equal to the energy density of the wave:
16.34
If the material is perfectly reflecting, such as a metal surface, and if the incidence is along the normal to the surface,
then the pressure exerted is twice as much because the momentum direction reverses upon reflection:
16.35

Access for free at openstax.org

16.4 • Momentum and Radiation Pressure

We can confirm that the units are right:

Equation 16.34 and Equation 16.35 give the instantaneous pressure, but because the energy density oscillates
rapidly, we are usually interested in the time-averaged radiation pressure, which can be written in terms of intensity:
16.36

Radiation pressure plays a role in explaining many observed astronomical phenomena, including the appearance of
comets. Comets are basically chunks of icy material in which frozen gases and particles of rock and dust are
embedded. When a comet approaches the Sun, it warms up and its surface begins to evaporate. The coma of the
comet is the hazy area around it from the gases and dust. Some of the gases and dust form tails when they leave the
comet. Notice in Figure 16.15 that a comet has two tails. The ion tail (or gas tail in Figure 16.15) is composed mainly
of ionized gases. These ions interact electromagnetically with the solar wind, which is a continuous stream of
charged particles emitted by the Sun. The force of the solar wind on the ionized gases is strong enough that the ion
tail almost always points directly away from the Sun. The second tail is composed of dust particles. Because the
dust tail is electrically neutral, it does not interact with the solar wind. However, this tail is affected by the radiation
pressure produced by the light from the Sun. Although quite small, this pressure is strong enough to cause the dust
tail to be displaced from the path of the comet.

FIGURE 16.15 Evaporation of material being warmed by the Sun forms two tails, as shown in this photo of Comet Ison. (credit: modification
of work by E. Slawik—ESO)

EXAMPLE 16.6
Halley’s Comet
On February 9, 1986, Comet Halley was at its closest point to the Sun, about
Sun. The average power output of the Sun is

from the center of the

(a) Calculate the radiation pressure on the comet at this point in its orbit. Assume that the comet reflects all the
incident light.
(b) Suppose that a 10-kg chunk of material of cross-sectional area

breaks loose from the comet.

677

678

16 • Electromagnetic Waves

Calculate the force on this chunk due to the solar radiation. Compare this force with the gravitational force of the
Sun.
Strategy
Calculate the intensity of solar radiation at the given distance from the Sun and use that to calculate the radiation
pressure. From the pressure and area, calculate the force.
Solution
a. The intensity of the solar radiation is the average solar power per unit area. Hence, at
center of the Sun, we have

from the

Assuming the comet reflects all the incident radiation, we obtain from Equation 16.36

b. The force on the chunk due to the radiation is

whereas the gravitational force of the Sun is

Significance
The gravitational force of the Sun on the chunk is therefore much greater than the force of the radiation.
After Maxwell showed that light carried momentum as well as energy, a novel idea eventually emerged, initially only
as science fiction. Perhaps a spacecraft with a large reflecting light sail could use radiation pressure for propulsion.
Such a vehicle would not have to carry fuel. It would experience a constant but small force from solar radiation,
instead of the short bursts from rocket propulsion. It would accelerate slowly, but by being accelerated
continuously, it would eventually reach great speeds. A spacecraft with small total mass and a sail with a large area
would be necessary to obtain a usable acceleration.
When the space program began in the 1960s, the idea started to receive serious attention from NASA. The most
recent development in light propelled spacecraft has come from a citizen-funded group, the Planetary Society. It is
currently testing the use of light sails to propel a small vehicle built from CubeSats, tiny satellites that NASA places
in orbit for various research projects during space launches intended mainly for other purposes.
The LightSail spacecraft shown below (Figure 16.16) consists of three CubeSats bundled together. It has a total
mass of only about 5 kg and is about the size as a loaf of bread. Its sails are made of very thin Mylar and open after
launch to have a surface area of

Access for free at openstax.org

16.4 • Momentum and Radiation Pressure

FIGURE 16.16 Two small CubeSat satellites deployed from the International Space Station in May, 2016. The solar sails open out when the
CubeSats are far enough away from the Station. (credit: modification of work by NASA)

INTERACTIVE
The first LightSail spacecraft was launched in 2015 to test the sail deployment system. It was placed in low-earth
orbit in 2015 by hitching a ride on an Atlas 5 rocket launched for an unrelated mission. The test was successful, but
the low-earth orbit allowed too much drag on the spacecraft to accelerate it by sunlight. Eventually, it burned in the
atmosphere, as expected. The next Planetary Society’s LightSail solar sailing spacecraft is scheduled for 2016. An
illustration (https://openstax.org/l/21lightsail) of the spacecraft, as it is expected to appear in flight, can be seen on
the Planetary Society’s website.

EXAMPLE 16.7
LightSail Acceleration
The intensity of energy from sunlight at a distance of 1 AU from the Sun is
. The LightSail spacecraft has
sails with total area of
and a total mass of 5.0 kg. Calculate the maximum acceleration LightSail spacecraft
could achieve from radiation pressure when it is about 1 AU from the Sun.
Strategy
The maximum acceleration can be expected when the sail is opened directly facing the Sun. Use the light intensity
to calculate the radiation pressure and from it, the force on the sails. Then use Newton’s second law to calculate the
acceleration.
Solution
The radiation pressure is

The resulting acceleration is

679

680

16 • Electromagnetic Waves

Significance
If this small acceleration continued for a year, the craft would attain a speed of 1829 m/s, or 6600 km/h.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 16.5
How would the speed and acceleration of a radiation-propelled spacecraft be affected as it moved farther from the
Sun on an interplanetary space flight?

16.5 The Electromagnetic Spectrum
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain how electromagnetic waves are divided into different ranges, depending on wavelength and
corresponding frequency
• Describe how electromagnetic waves in different categories are produced
• Describe some of the many practical everyday applications of electromagnetic waves
Electromagnetic waves have a vast range of practical everyday applications that includes such diverse uses as
communication by cell phone and radio broadcasting, WiFi, cooking, vision, medical imaging, and treating cancer. In
this module, we discuss how electromagnetic waves are classified into categories such as radio, infrared, ultraviolet,
and so on. We also summarize some of the main applications for each range.
The different categories of electromagnetic waves differ in their wavelength range, or equivalently, in their
corresponding frequency ranges. Their properties change smoothly from one frequency range to the next, with
different applications in each range. A brief overview of the production and utilization of electromagnetic waves is
found in Table 16.1.
Type of
wave

Production

Applications

Issues

Radio

Accelerating charges

Communications
Remote controls
MRI

Requires control for band
use

Microwaves

Accelerating charges and thermal agitation

Communications
Ovens
Radar
Cell phone use

Infrared

Thermal agitation and electronic
transitions

Thermal imaging
Heating

Visible light

Thermal agitation and electronic
transitions

Photosynthesis
Human vision

Ultraviolet

Thermal agitation and electronic
transitions

Sterilization
Vitamin D
production

TABLE 16.1 Electromagnetic Waves

Access for free at openstax.org

Absorbed by atmosphere
Greenhouse effect

Ozone depletion
Cancer causing

16.5 • The Electromagnetic Spectrum

Type of
wave

Production

Applications

Issues

X-rays

Inner electronic transitions and fast
collisions

Security
Medical diagnosis
Cancer therapy

Cancer causing

Gamma rays

Nuclear decay

Nuclear medicine
Security
Medical diagnosis
Cancer therapy

Cancer causing
Radiation damage

TABLE 16.1 Electromagnetic Waves

The relationship
between frequency f and wavelength applies to all waves and ensures that greater
frequency means smaller wavelength. Figure 16.17 shows how the various types of electromagnetic waves are
categorized according to their wavelengths and frequencies—that is, it shows the electromagnetic spectrum.

FIGURE 16.17 The electromagnetic spectrum, showing the major categories of electromagnetic waves.

Radio Waves
The term radio waves refers to electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths greater than about 0.1 m. Radio waves
are commonly used for audio communications (i.e., for radios), but the term is used for electromagnetic waves in
this range regardless of their application. Radio waves typically result from an alternating current in the wires of a
broadcast antenna. They cover a very broad wavelength range and are divided into many subranges, including
microwaves, electromagnetic waves used for AM and FM radio, cellular telephones, and TV signals.
There is no lowest frequency of radio waves, but ELF waves, or “extremely low frequency” are among the lowest
frequencies commonly encountered, from 3 Hz to 3 kHz. The accelerating charge in the ac currents of electrical
power lines produce electromagnetic waves in this range. ELF waves are able to penetrate sea water, which strongly
absorbs electromagnetic waves of higher frequency, and therefore are useful for submarine communications.
In order to use an electromagnetic wave to transmit information, the amplitude, frequency, or phase of the wave is
modulated, or varied in a controlled way that encodes the intended information into the wave. In AM radio
transmission, the amplitude of the wave is modulated to mimic the vibrations of the sound being conveyed. Fourier’s
theorem implies that the modulated AM wave amounts to a superposition of waves covering some narrow frequency
range. Each AM station is assigned a specific carrier frequency that, by international agreement, is allowed to vary
by
. In FM radio transmission, the frequency of the wave is modulated to carry this information, as illustrated

681

682

16 • Electromagnetic Waves

in Figure 16.18, and the frequency of each station is allowed to use 100 kHz on each side of its carrier frequency.
The electromagnetic wave produces a current in a receiving antenna, and the radio or television processes the signal
to produce the sound and any image. The higher the frequency of the radio wave used to carry the data, the greater
the detailed variation of the wave that can be carried by modulating it over each time unit, and the more data that
can be transmitted per unit of time. The assigned frequencies for AM broadcasting are 540 to 1600 kHz, and for FM
are 88 MHz to108 MHz.

FIGURE 16.18 Electromagnetic waves are used to carry communications signals by varying the wave’s amplitude (AM), its frequency (FM),
or its phase.

Cell phone conversations, and television voice and video images are commonly transmitted as digital data, by
converting the signal into a sequence of binary ones and zeros. This allows clearer data transmission when the
signal is weak, and allows using computer algorithms to compress the digital data to transmit more data in each
frequency range. Computer data as well is transmitted as a sequence of binary ones and zeros, each one or zero
constituting one bit of data.

Microwaves
Microwaves are the highest-frequency electromagnetic waves that can be produced by currents in macroscopic
circuits and devices. Microwave frequencies range from about
to nearly
. Their high frequencies
correspond to short wavelengths compared with other radio waves—hence the name “microwave.” Microwaves also
occur naturally as the cosmic background radiation left over from the origin of the universe. Along with other ranges
of electromagnetic waves, they are part of the radiation that any object above absolute zero emits and absorbs
because of thermal agitation, that is, from the thermal motion of its atoms and molecules.
Most satellite-transmitted information is carried on microwaves. Radar is a common application of microwaves. By
detecting and timing microwave echoes, radar systems can determine the distance to objects as diverse as clouds,
aircraft, or even the surface of Venus.
Microwaves of 2.45 GHz are commonly used in microwave ovens. The electrons in a water molecule tend to remain
closer to the oxygen nucleus than the hydrogen nuclei (Figure 16.19). This creates two separated centers of equal
and opposite charges, giving the molecule a dipole moment (see Electric Field). The oscillating electric field of the
microwaves inside the oven exerts a torque that tends to align each molecule first in one direction and then in the
other, with the motion of each molecule coupled to others around it. This pumps energy into the continual thermal
motion of the water to heat the food. The plate under the food contains no water, and remains relatively unheated.

Access for free at openstax.org

16.5 • The Electromagnetic Spectrum

FIGURE 16.19 The oscillating electric field in a microwave oven exerts a torque on water molecules because of their dipole moment, and
the torque reverses direction
times per second. Interactions between the molecules distributes the energy being pumped into
them. The
and
denote the charge distribution on the molecules.

The microwaves in a microwave oven reflect off the walls of the oven, so that the superposition of waves produces
standing waves, similar to the standing waves of a vibrating guitar or violin string (see Normal Modes of a Standing
Sound Wave (http://openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-1/pages/17-4-normal-modes-of-a-standingsound-wave)). A rotating fan acts as a stirrer by reflecting the microwaves in different directions, and food
turntables, help spread out the hot spots.

EXAMPLE 16.8
Why Microwave Ovens Heat Unevenly
How far apart are the hotspots in a 2.45-GHz microwave oven?
Strategy
Consider the waves along one direction in the oven, being reflected at the opposite wall from where they are
generated.
Solution
The antinodes, where maximum intensity occurs, are half the wavelength apart, with separation

Significance
The distance between the hot spots in a microwave oven are determined by the wavelength of the microwaves.
A cell phone has a radio receiver and a weak radio transmitter, both of which can quickly tune to hundreds of
specifically assigned microwave frequencies. The low intensity of the transmitted signal gives it an intentionally
limited range. A ground-based system links the phone to only to the broadcast tower assigned to the specific small
area, or cell, and smoothly transitions its connection to the next cell when the signal reception there is the stronger
one. This enables a cell phone to be used while changing location.
Microwaves also provide the WiFi that enables owners of cell phones, laptop computers, and similar devices to
connect wirelessly to the Internet at home and at coffee shops and airports. A wireless WiFi router is a device that
exchanges data over the Internet through the cable or another connection, and uses microwaves to exchange the
data wirelessly with devices such as cell phones and computers. The term WiFi itself refers to the standards
followed in modulating and analyzing the microwaves so that wireless routers and devices from different
manufacturers work compatibly with one another. The computer data in each direction consist of sequences of
binary zeros and ones, each corresponding to a binary bit. The microwaves are in the range of 2.4 GHz to 5.0 GHz
range.

683

684

16 • Electromagnetic Waves

Other wireless technologies also use microwaves to provide everyday communications between devices. Bluetooth
developed alongside WiFi as a standard for radio communication in the 2.4-GHz range between nearby devices, for
example, to link to headphones and audio earpieces to devices such as radios, or a driver’s cell phone to a handsfree device to allow answering phone calls without fumbling directly with the cell phone.
Microwaves find use also in radio tagging, using RFID (radio frequency identification) technology. Examples are RFID
tags attached to store merchandize, transponder for toll booths use attached to the windshield of a car, or even a
chip embedded into a pet’s skin. The device responds to a microwave signal by emitting a signal of its own with
encoded information, allowing stores to quickly ring up items at their cash registers, drivers to charge tolls to their
account without stopping, and lost pets to be reunited with their owners. NFC (near field communication) works
similarly, except it is much shorter range. Its mechanism of interaction is the induced magnetic field at microwave
frequencies between two coils. Cell phones that have NFC capability and the right software can supply information
for purchases using the cell phone instead of a physical credit card. The very short range of the data transfer is a
desired security feature in this case.

Infrared Radiation
The boundary between the microwave and infrared regions of the electromagnetic spectrum is not well defined (see
Figure 16.17). Infrared radiation is generally produced by thermal motion, and the vibration and rotation of atoms
and molecules. Electronic transitions in atoms and molecules can also produce infrared radiation. About half of the
solar energy arriving at Earth is in the infrared region, with most of the rest in the visible part of the spectrum. About
23% of the solar energy is absorbed in the atmosphere, about 48% is absorbed at Earth’s surface, and about 29% is
1
reflected back into space.
The range of infrared frequencies extends up to the lower limit of visible light, just below red. In fact, infrared means
“below red.” Water molecules rotate and vibrate particularly well at infrared frequencies. Reconnaissance satellites
can detect buildings, vehicles, and even individual humans by their infrared emissions, whose power radiation is
proportional to the fourth power of the absolute temperature. More mundanely, we use infrared lamps, including
those called quartz heaters, to preferentially warm us because we absorb infrared better than our surroundings.
The familiar handheld “remotes” for changing channels and settings on television sets often transmit their signal by
modulating an infrared beam. If you try to use a TV remote without the infrared emitter being in direct line of sight
with the infrared detector, you may find the television not responding. Some remotes use Bluetooth instead and
reduce this annoyance.

Visible Light
Visible light is the narrow segment of the electromagnetic spectrum between about 400 nm and about 750 nm to
which the normal human eye responds. Visible light is produced by vibrations and rotations of atoms and molecules,
as well as by electronic transitions within atoms and molecules. The receivers or detectors of light largely utilize
electronic transitions.
Red light has the lowest frequencies and longest wavelengths, whereas violet has the highest frequencies and
shortest wavelengths (Figure 16.20). Blackbody radiation from the Sun peaks in the visible part of the spectrum but
is more intense in the red than in the violet, making the sun yellowish in appearance.

FIGURE 16.20 A small part of the electromagnetic spectrum that includes its visible components. The divisions between infrared, visible,
and ultraviolet are not perfectly distinct, nor are those between the seven rainbow colors.

Living things—plants and animals—have evolved to utilize and respond to parts of the electromagnetic spectrum in
which they are embedded. We enjoy the beauty of nature through visible light. Plants are more selective.
1 http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Features/EnergyBalance/page4.php

Access for free at openstax.org

16.5 • The Electromagnetic Spectrum

Photosynthesis uses parts of the visible spectrum to make sugars.

Ultraviolet Radiation
Ultraviolet means “above violet.” The electromagnetic frequencies of ultraviolet radiation (UV) extend upward from
violet, the highest-frequency visible light. The highest-frequency ultraviolet overlaps with the lowest-frequency Xrays. The wavelengths of ultraviolet extend from 400 nm down to about 10 nm at its highest frequencies. Ultraviolet
is produced by atomic and molecular motions and electronic transitions.
UV radiation from the Sun is broadly subdivided into three wavelength ranges: UV-A (320–400 nm) is the lowest
frequency, then UV-B (290–320 nm) and UV-C (220–290 nm). Most UV-B and all UV-C are absorbed by ozone ( )
molecules in the upper atmosphere. Consequently, 99% of the solar UV radiation reaching Earth’s surface is UV-A.
Sunburn is caused by large exposures to UV-B and UV-C, and repeated exposure can increase the likelihood of skin
cancer. The tanning response is a defense mechanism in which the body produces pigments in inert skin layers to
reduce exposure of the living cells below. However, tanning is not sufficient protection, and people are generally
advised to avoid prolonged exposure to sunlight and to wear sunscreen or protective clothing when outside — even
on cloudy days.
Because it absorbs harmful UV radiation, ozone is important to many life forms and to the overall climate. Ozone is
depleted by chemicals, which can result in areas of lower concentration -- often referred to as "holes" although the
term is entirely accurate. Mario Molina and F. Sherwood Rowland found that chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), which were
extremely common commercial substances, were responsible for ozone depletion. UV radiation itself broke down
CFCs, releasing chlorine atoms that reacted with and eliminated ozone. Other substances have since been proven to
have the same effect.
As examined in a later chapter, the shorter the wavelength of light, the greater the energy change of an atom or
molecule that absorbs the light in an electronic transition. This makes short-wavelength ultraviolet light damaging to
living cells. It also explains why ultraviolet radiation is better able than visible light to cause some materials to glow,
or fluoresce.
Besides the adverse effects of ultraviolet radiation, there are also benefits of exposure in nature and uses in
technology. Vitamin D production in the skin results from exposure to UV-B radiation, generally from sunlight.
Several studies suggest vitamin D deficiency is associated with the development of a range of cancers (prostate,
breast, colon), as well as osteoporosis. Low-intensity ultraviolet has applications such as providing the energy to
cause certain dyes to fluoresce and emit visible light, for example, in printed money to display hidden watermarks
as counterfeit protection.
One of the first illustrations of UV light’s impact on Earth occurred during the Apollo 16 mission in 1972. The mission
included the first astronomical images taken from the moon, using a compact and resilient Far Ultraviolet Camera/
Spectrograph designed for moon use by scientist and inventor George Robert Carruthers. Designed to capture UV
images without the obscuring effects of the Earth’s atmosphere, its most famous image was of the planet itself.
Carruthers, who also trained the astronauts on the device’s use, mentioned afterward that “the most immediately
obvious and spectacular results were really for the Earth observations, because this was the first time that the Earth
had been photographed from a distance in ultraviolet (UV) light, so that you could see the full extent of the hydrogen
atmosphere, the polar auroris and what we call the tropical airglow belt.”

X-Rays
X-rays have wavelengths from about
. They have shorter wavelengths, and higher frequencies,
than ultraviolet, so that the energy they transfer at an atomic level is greater. As a result, X-rays have adverse effects
on living cells similar to those of ultraviolet radiation, but they are more penetrating. Cancer and genetic defects can
be induced by X-rays. Because of their effect on rapidly dividing cells, X-rays can also be used to treat and even cure
cancer.
The widest use of X-rays is for imaging objects that are opaque to visible light, such as the human body or aircraft
parts. In humans, the risk of cell damage is weighed carefully against the benefit of the diagnostic information
obtained.

685

686

16 • Electromagnetic Waves

Gamma Rays
Soon after nuclear radioactivity was first detected in 1896, it was found that at least three distinct types of radiation
were being emitted, and these were designated as alpha, beta, and gamma rays. The most penetrating nuclear
radiation, the gamma ray ( ray), was later found to be an extremely high-frequency electromagnetic wave.
The lower end of the ray frequency range overlaps the upper end of the X-ray range. Gamma rays have
characteristics identical to X-rays of the same frequency—they differ only in source. The name “gamma rays” is
generally used for electromagnetic radiation emitted by a nucleus, while X-rays are generally produced by
bombarding a target with energetic electrons in an X-ray tube. At higher frequencies, rays are more penetrating
and more damaging to living tissue. They have many of the same uses as X-rays, including cancer therapy. Gamma
radiation from radioactive materials is used in nuclear medicine.

INTERACTIVE
Engage the Phet simulation below to explore how light interacts with molecules in our atmosphere. Notice that the
absorption of light depends on the molecule and the type of light. Then, relate the energy of the light to the resulting
motion. Notice that energy increases from microwave to ultraviolet. Lastly, predict the motion of a molecule based
on the type of light it absorbs.
Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-2/pages/16-5-theelectromagnetic-spectrum)

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 16.6
How do the electromagnetic waves for the different kinds of electromagnetic radiation differ?

Access for free at openstax.org

