11 • Chapter Review

489

Chapter Review
Key Terms
cosmic rays comprised of particles that originate
mainly from outside the solar system and reach
Earth
cyclotron device used to accelerate charged particles
to large kinetic energies
dees large metal containers used in cyclotrons that
serve contain a stream of charged particles as their
speed is increased
gauss G, unit of the magnetic field strength;
Hall effect creation of voltage across a currentcarrying conductor by a magnetic field
helical motion superposition of circular motion with a
straight-line motion that is followed by a charged
particle moving in a region of magnetic field at an
angle to the field
magnetic dipole closed-current loop
magnetic dipole moment term IA of the magnetic
dipole, also called
magnetic field lines continuous curves that show the
direction of a magnetic field; these lines point in the
same direction as a compass points, toward the
magnetic south pole of a bar magnet
magnetic force force applied to a charged particle
moving through a magnetic field
mass spectrometer device that separates ions

according to their charge-to-mass ratios
motor (dc) loop of wire in a magnetic field; when
current is passed through the loops, the magnetic
field exerts torque on the loops, which rotates a
shaft; electrical energy is converted into mechanical
work in the process
north magnetic pole currently where a compass
points to north, near the geographic North Pole; this
is the effective south pole of a bar magnet but has
flipped between the effective north and south poles
of a bar magnet multiple times over the age of Earth
right-hand rule-1 using your right hand to determine
the direction of either the magnetic force, velocity of
a charged particle, or magnetic field
south magnetic pole currently where a compass
points to the south, near the geographic South Pole;
this is the effective north pole of a bar magnet but
has flipped just like the north magnetic pole
tesla SI unit for magnetic field: 1 T = 1 N/A-m
velocity selector apparatus where the crossed
electric and magnetic fields produce equal and
opposite forces on a charged particle moving with a
specific velocity; this particle moves through the
velocity selector not affected by either field while
particles moving with different velocities are
deflected by the apparatus

Key Equations
Force on a charge in a magnetic field
Magnitude of magnetic force
Radius of a particle’s path in a magnetic field
Period of a particle’s motion in a magnetic field
Force on a current-carrying wire in a uniform magnetic field
Magnetic dipole moment
Torque on a current loop
Energy of a magnetic dipole
Drift velocity in crossed electric and magnetic fields
Hall potential
Hall potential in terms of drift velocity
Charge-to-mass ratio in a mass spectrometer
Maximum speed of a particle in a cyclotron

Summary
11.1 Magnetism and Its Historical Discoveries
• Magnets have two types of magnetic poles,

called the north magnetic pole and the south
magnetic pole. North magnetic poles are those
that are attracted toward Earth’s geographic

490

11 • Chapter Review

North Pole.
• Like poles repel and unlike poles attract.
• Discoveries of how magnets respond to currents
by Oersted and others created a framework that
led to the invention of modern electronic devices,
electric motors, and magnetic imaging
technology.
11.2 Magnetic Fields and Lines
• Charges moving across a magnetic field
experience a force determined by
The force is perpendicular to the plane formed by
and
• The direction of the force on a moving charge is
given by the right hand rule 1 (RHR-1): Sweep
your fingers in a velocity, magnetic field plane.
Start by pointing them in the direction of velocity
and sweep towards the magnetic field. Your
thumb points in the direction of the magnetic
force for positive charges.
• Magnetic fields can be pictorially represented by
magnetic field lines, which have the following
properties:
1. The field is tangent to the magnetic field line.
2. Field strength is proportional to the line
density.
3. Field lines cannot cross.
4. Field lines form continuous, closed loops.
• Magnetic poles always occur in pairs of north and
south—it is not possible to isolate north and
south poles.
11.3 Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic Field
• A magnetic force can supply centripetal force
and cause a charged particle to move in a circular
path of radius
• The period of circular motion for a charged
particle moving in a magnetic field perpendicular
to the plane of motion is
• Helical motion results if the velocity of the
charged particle has a component parallel to the
magnetic field as well as a component
perpendicular to the magnetic field.

11.4 Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying
Conductor
• An electrical current produces a magnetic field
around the wire.
• The directionality of the magnetic field produced
is determined by the right hand rule-2, where
your thumb points in the direction of the current
and your fingers wrap around the wire in the
direction of the magnetic field.
• The magnetic force on current-carrying
conductors is given by
where I is
the current and l is the length of a wire in a
uniform magnetic field B.
11.5 Force and Torque on a Current Loop
• The net force on a current-carrying loop of any
plane shape in a uniform magnetic field is zero.
• The net torque τ on a current-carrying loop of
any shape in a uniform magnetic field is
calculated using

where

is the

magnetic dipole moment and is the magnetic
field strength.
• The magnetic dipole moment is the product of
the number of turns of wire N, the current in the
loop I, and the area of the loop A or
11.6 The Hall Effect
• Perpendicular electric and magnetic fields exert
equal and opposite forces for a specific velocity
of entering particles, thereby acting as a velocity
selector. The velocity that passes through
undeflected is calculated by
• The Hall effect can be used to measure the sign
of the majority of charge carriers for metals. It
can also be used to measure a magnetic field.
11.7 Applications of Magnetic Forces and Fields
• A mass spectrometer is a device that separates
ions according to their charge-to-mass ratios by
first sending them through a velocity selector,
then a uniform magnetic field.
• Cyclotrons are used to accelerate charged
particles to large kinetic energies through applied
electric and magnetic fields.

Conceptual Questions
11.2 Magnetic Fields and Lines
1. Discuss the similarities and differences between
the electrical force on a charge and the magnetic
force on a charge.

Access for free at openstax.org

2. (a) Is it possible for the magnetic force on a
charge moving in a magnetic field to be zero? (b)
Is it possible for the electric force on a charge
moving in an electric field to be zero? (c) Is it
possible for the resultant of the electric and
magnetic forces on a charge moving

11 • Chapter Review

simultaneously through both fields to be zero?
11.3 Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic Field
3. At a given instant, an electron and a proton are
moving with the same velocity in a constant
magnetic field. Compare the magnetic forces on
these particles. Compare their accelerations.
4. Does increasing the magnitude of a uniform
magnetic field through which a charge is
traveling necessarily mean increasing the
magnetic force on the charge? Does changing
the direction of the field necessarily mean a
change in the force on the charge?
5. An electron passes through a magnetic field
without being deflected. What do you conclude
about the magnetic field?
6. If a charged particle moves in a straight line and
no non-magnetic force acts on it, can you
conclude that there is no magnetic field present?
7. How could you determine which pole of an
electromagnet is north and which pole is south?
11.4 Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying
Conductor
8. Describe the error that results from accidently

Problems
11.2 Magnetic Fields and Lines
15. What is the direction of the magnetic force on a
positive charge that moves as shown in each of the
six cases?

491

using your left rather than your right hand when
determining the direction of a magnetic force.
9. Considering the magnetic force law, are the
velocity and magnetic field always
perpendicular? Are the force and velocity always
perpendicular? What about the force and
magnetic field?
10. Why can a nearby magnet distort a cathode ray
tube television picture?
11. A magnetic field exerts a force on the moving
electrons in a current carrying wire. What exerts
the force on a wire?
12. There are regions where the magnetic field of
earth is almost perpendicular to the surface of
Earth. What difficulty does this cause in the use
of a compass?
11.6 The Hall Effect
13. Hall potentials are much larger for poor
conductors than for good conductors with the
same current. Why?
11.7 Applications of Magnetic Forces and Fields
14. Describe the primary function of the electric
field and the magnetic field in a cyclotron.

492

11 • Chapter Review

18. Repeat previous exercise for a positive charge.
19. What is the direction of the magnetic field that
produces the magnetic force on a positive
charge as shown in each of the three cases,
assuming

is perpendicular to ?

16. Repeat previous exercise for a negative charge.
17. What is the direction of the velocity of a negative
charge that experiences the magnetic force
shown in each of the three cases, assuming it
moves perpendicular to B?

20. Repeat previous exercise for a negative charge.
21. (a) Aircraft sometimes acquire small static
charges. Suppose a supersonic jet has a
0.500-μC charge and flies due west at a speed

Access for free at openstax.org

11 • Chapter Review

of 660. m/s over Earth’s south magnetic pole,
where the
magnetic field
points straight down into the ground. What are
the direction and the magnitude of the magnetic
force on the plane? (b) Discuss whether the
value obtained in part (a) implies this is a
significant or negligible effect.
22. (a) A cosmic ray proton moving toward Earth at
experiences a magnetic force of
What is the strength of the
magnetic field if there is a 45º angle between it
and the proton’s velocity? (b) Is the value
obtained in part a. consistent with the known
strength of Earth’s magnetic field on its surface?
Discuss.
23. An electron moving at
in a
1.25-T magnetic field experiences a magnetic
force of
What angle does the
velocity of the electron make with the magnetic
field? There are two answers.
24. (a) A physicist performing a sensitive
measurement wants to limit the magnetic force
on a moving charge in her equipment to less
than
What is the greatest the
charge can be if it moves at a maximum speed of
30.0 m/s in Earth’s field? (b) Discuss whether it
would be difficult to limit the charge to less than
the value found in (a) by comparing it with
typical static electricity and noting that static is
often absent.
11.3 Motion of a Charged Particle in a Magnetic Field
25. A cosmic-ray electron moves at
perpendicular to Earth’s magnetic field at an
altitude where the field strength is
What is the radius of the circular
path the electron follows?
26. (a) Viewers of Star Trek have heard of an
antimatter drive on the Starship Enterprise. One
possibility for such a futuristic energy source is
to store antimatter charged particles in a
vacuum chamber, circulating in a magnetic field,
and then extract them as needed. Antimatter
annihilates normal matter, producing pure
energy. What strength magnetic field is needed
to hold antiprotons, moving at
in
a circular path 2.00 m in radius? Antiprotons
have the same mass as protons but the opposite
(negative) charge. (b) Is this field strength
obtainable with today’s technology or is it a
futuristic possibility?

493

27. (a) An oxygen-16 ion with a mass of
travels at
perpendicular to a 1.20-T magnetic field, which
makes it move in a circular arc with a 0.231-m
radius. What positive charge is on the ion? (b)
What is the ratio of this charge to the charge of
an electron? (c) Discuss why the ratio found in
(b) should be an integer.
28. An electron in a TV CRT moves with a speed of
in a direction perpendicular to
Earth’s field, which has a strength of
(a) What strength electric field
must be applied perpendicular to the Earth’s
field to make the electron moves in a straight
line? (b) If this is done between plates separated
by 1.00 cm, what is the voltage applied? (Note
that TVs are usually surrounded by a
ferromagnetic material to shield against external
magnetic fields and avoid the need for such a
correction.)
29. (a) At what speed will a proton move in a circular
path of the same radius as the electron in the
previous exercise? (b) What would the radius of
the path be if the proton had the same speed as
the electron? (c) What would the radius be if the
proton had the same kinetic energy as the
electron? (d) The same momentum?
30. (a) What voltage will accelerate electrons to a
speed of
(b) Find the radius of
curvature of the path of a proton accelerated
through this potential in a 0.500-T field and
compare this with the radius of curvature of an
electron accelerated through the same
potential.
31. An alpha-particle
travels in a circular path of
radius 25 cm in a uniform magnetic field of
magnitude 1.5 T. (a) What is the speed of the
particle? (b) What is the kinetic energy in
electron-volts? (c) Through what potential
difference must the particle be accelerated in
order to give it this kinetic energy?
32. A particle of charge q and mass m is accelerated
from rest through a potential difference V, after
which it encounters a uniform magnetic field B.
If the particle moves in a plane perpendicular to
B, what is the radius of its circular orbit?

494

11 • Chapter Review

11.4 Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying
Conductor
33. What is the direction of the magnetic force on the
current in each of the six cases?

35. What is the direction of the magnetic field that
produces the magnetic force shown on the
currents in each of the three cases, assuming
is perpendicular to I?

34. What is the direction of a current that
experiences the magnetic force shown in each of
the three cases, assuming the current runs
perpendicular to

?

36. (a) What is the force per meter on a lightning
bolt at the equator that carries 20,000 A
perpendicular to Earth’s
field? (b)
What is the direction of the force if the current is

Access for free at openstax.org

11 • Chapter Review

straight up and Earth’s field direction is due
north, parallel to the ground?
37. (a) A dc power line for a light-rail system carries
1000 A at an angle of 30.0º to Earth’s
field. What is the force on a
100-m section of this line? (b) Discuss practical
concerns this presents, if any.
38. A wire carrying a 30.0-A current passes between
the poles of a strong magnet that is
perpendicular to its field and experiences a
2.16-N force on the 4.00 cm of wire in the field.
What is the average field strength?
11.5 Force and Torque on a Current Loop
39. (a) By how many percent is the torque of a motor
decreased if its permanent magnets lose 5.0%
of their strength? (b) How many percent would
the current need to be increased to return the
torque to original values?

495

of
What are the direction and
magnitude of the torque on the loop? (b) Does
this device have any practical applications as a
motor?

47. Repeat the previous problem, but with the loop
lying flat on the ground with its current
circulating counterclockwise (when viewed from
above) in a location where Earth’s field is north,
but at an angle 45.0° below the horizontal and
with a strength of

40. (a) What is the maximum torque on a 150-turn
square loop of wire 18.0 cm on a side that
carries a 50.0-A current in a 1.60-T field? (b)
What is the torque when θ is 10.9º?
41. Find the current through a loop needed to create
a maximum torque of
The loop has 50
square turns that are 15.0 cm on a side and is in
a uniform 0.800-T magnetic field.
42. Calculate the magnetic field strength needed on
a 200-turn square loop 20.0 cm on a side to
create a maximum torque of 300 N ⋅ m if the
loop is carrying 25.0 A.
43. Since the equation for torque on a currentcarrying loop is τ = NIAB sin θ, the units of N ⋅ m
must equal units of A ⋅ m2 T. Verify this.
44. (a) At what angle θ is the torque on a current
loop 90.0% of maximum? (b) 50.0% of
maximum? (c) 10.0% of maximum?
45. A proton has a magnetic field due to its spin. The
field is similar to that created by a circular
current loop
in radius with a
current of
Find the maximum
torque on a proton in a 2.50-T field. (This is a
significant torque on a small particle.)
46. (a) A 200-turn circular loop of radius 50.0 cm is
vertical, with its axis on an east-west line. A
current of 100 A circulates clockwise in the loop
when viewed from the east. Earth’s field here is
due north, parallel to the ground, with a strength

11.6 The Hall Effect
48. A strip of copper is placed in a uniform magnetic
field of magnitude 2.5 T. The Hall electric field is
measured to be
(a) What is the
drift speed of the conduction electrons? (b)
Assuming that n =
electrons per
cubic meter and that the cross-sectional area of
the strip is
calculate the current
in the strip. (c) What is the Hall coefficient 1/nq?
49. The cross-sectional dimensions of the copper strip
shown are 2.0 cm by 2.0 mm. The strip carries a
current of 100 A, and it is placed in a magnetic field
of magnitude B = 1.5 T. What are the value and
polarity of the Hall potential in the copper strip?

50. The magnitudes of the electric and magnetic
fields in a velocity selector are
and 0.080 T, respectively. (a) What speed must a
proton have to pass through the selector? (b)

496

11 • Chapter Review

Also calculate the speeds required for an alphaparticle and a singly ionized
atom to pass
through the selector.
51. A charged particle moves through a velocity
selector at constant velocity. In the selector, E =
and B = 0.250 T. When the
electric field is turned off, the charged particle
travels in a circular path of radius 3.33 mm.
Determine the charge-to-mass ratio of the
particle.
52. A Hall probe gives a reading of
for a
current of 2 A when it is placed in a magnetic
field of 1 T. What is the magnetic field in a region
where the reading is
for 1.7 A of current?
11.7 Applications of Magnetic Forces and Fields
53. A physicist is designing a cyclotron to accelerate
protons to one-tenth the speed of light. The
magnetic field will have a strength of 1.5 T.
Determine (a) the rotational period of the
circulating protons and (b) the maximum radius
of the protons’ orbit.
54. The strengths of the fields in the velocity
selector of a Bainbridge mass spectrometer are
B = 0.500 T and E =
and the
strength of the magnetic field that separates the
ions is
A stream of singly charged
Li ions is found to bend in a circular arc of radius
2.32 cm. What is the mass of the Li ions?
55. The magnetic field in a cyclotron is 1.25 T, and
the maximum orbital radius of the circulating

protons is 0.40 m. (a) What is the kinetic energy
of the protons when they are ejected from the
cyclotron? (b) What is this energy in MeV? (c)
Through what potential difference would a
proton have to be accelerated to acquire this
kinetic energy? (d) What is the period of the
voltage source used to accelerate the protons?
(e) Repeat the calculations for alpha-particles.
56. A mass spectrometer is being used to separate
common oxygen-16 from the much rarer
oxygen-18, taken from a sample of old glacial
ice. (The relative abundance of these oxygen
isotopes is related to climatic temperature at the
time the ice was deposited.) The ratio of the
masses of these two ions is 16 to 18, the mass
of oxygen-16 is
and they are
singly charged and travel at
in a
1.20-T magnetic field. What is the separation
between their paths when they hit a target after
traversing a semicircle?
57. (a) Triply charged uranium-235 and
uranium-238 ions are being separated in a mass
spectrometer. (The much rarer uranium-235 is
used as reactor fuel.) The masses of the ions are
and
respectively, and they travel at
in
a 0.250-T field. What is the separation between
their paths when they hit a target after traversing
a semicircle? (b) Discuss whether this distance
between their paths seems to be big enough to
be practical in the separation of uranium-235
from uranium-238.

Additional Problems
58. Calculate the magnetic force on a hypothetical
particle of charge
moving with a
velocity of
in a magnetic field of

62. Four different proton velocities are given. For
each case, determine the magnetic force on the
proton in terms of e,
and

59. Repeat the previous problem with a new
magnetic field of
60. An electron is projected into a uniform magnetic
field

with a velocity of
What is the magnetic

force on the electron?
61. The mass and charge of a water droplet are
and
respectively. If
the droplet is given an initial horizontal velocity
of
what magnetic field will keep
it moving in this direction? Why must gravity be
considered here?

Access for free at openstax.org

63. An electron of kinetic energy 2000 eV passes
between parallel plates that are 1.0 cm apart

11 • Chapter Review

and kept at a potential difference of 300 V. What
is the strength of the uniform magnetic field B
that will allow the electron to travel undeflected
through the plates? Assume E and B are
perpendicular.
64. An alpha-particle
moving with a velocity
enters a region
where

and
What is the initial

force on it?
65. An electron moving with a velocity
enters a
region where there is a uniform electric field and
a uniform magnetic field. The magnetic field is
given by
If the electron travels through a region without
being deflected, what is the electric field?
66. At a particular instant, an electron is traveling
west to east with a kinetic energy of 10 keV.
Earth’s magnetic field has a horizontal
component of
north and a vertical
component of
down. (a) What is
the path of the electron? (b) What is the radius of
curvature of the path?
67. What is the (a) path of a proton and (b) the
magnetic force on the proton that is traveling
west to east with a kinetic energy of 10 keV in
Earth’s magnetic field that has a horizontal
component of 1.8 x 10–5 T north and a vertical
component of 5.0 x 10–5 T down?
68. What magnetic field is required in order to
confine a proton moving with a speed of
to a circular orbit of radius 10
cm?
69. An electron and a proton move with the same
speed in a plane perpendicular to a uniform
magnetic field. Compare the radii and periods of
their orbits.
70. A proton and an alpha-particle have the same
kinetic energy and both move in a plane
perpendicular to a uniform magnetic field.
Compare the periods of their orbits.
71. A singly charged ion takes
to
complete eight revolutions in a uniform
magnetic field of magnitude
What is the mass of the ion?

497

72. A particle moving downward at a speed of
enters a uniform magnetic field
that is horizontal and directed from east to west.
(a) If the particle is deflected initially to the
north in a circular arc, is its charge positive or
negative? (b) If B = 0.25 T and the charge-tomass ratio (q/m) of the particle is
what is the radius of the path?
(c) What is the speed of the particle after it has
moved in the field for
for 2.0 s?
73. A proton, deuteron, and an alpha-particle are all
accelerated from rest through the same
potential difference. They then enter the same
magnetic field, moving perpendicular to it.
Compute the ratios of the radii of their circular
paths. Assume that
and
74. A singly charged ion is moving in a uniform
magnetic field of
completes 10
revolutions in
Identify the ion.
75. Two particles have the same linear momentum,
but particle A has four times the charge of
particle B. If both particles move in a plane
perpendicular to a uniform magnetic field, what
is the ratio
of the radii of their circular
orbits?
76. A uniform magnetic field of magnitude is
directed parallel to the z-axis. A proton enters
the field with a velocity
and travels in a
helical path with a radius of 5.0 cm. (a) What is
the value of ? (b) What is the time required for
one trip around the helix? (c) Where is the
proton
after entering the field?
77. An electron moving along the +x -axis at
enters a magnetic field that
makes a
angle with the x-axis of magnitude
0.20 T. Calculate the (a) pitch and (b) radius of
the trajectory.
78. (a) A 0.750-m-long section of cable carrying
current to a car starter motor makes an angle of
60º with Earth’s
field. What is the
current when the wire experiences a force of
(b) If you run the wire between
the poles of a strong horseshoe magnet,
subjecting 5.00 cm of it to a 1.75-T field, what
force is exerted on this segment of wire?
79. (a) What is the angle between a wire carrying an
8.00-A current and the 1.20-T field it is in if 50.0
cm of the wire experiences a magnetic force of

498

11 • Chapter Review

2.40 N? (b) What is the force on the wire if it is
rotated to make an angle of 90º with the field?
80. A 1.0-m-long segment of wire lies along the
x-axis and carries a current of 2.0 A in the
positive x-direction. Around the wire is the
magnetic field of
Find the magnetic force on this segment.
81. A 5.0-m section of a long, straight wire carries a
current of 10 A while in a uniform magnetic field
of magnitude
Calculate the
magnitude of the force on the section if the
angle between the field and the direction of the
current is (a) 45°; (b) 90°; (c) 0°; or (d) 180°.
82. An electromagnet produces a magnetic field of
magnitude 1.5 T throughout a cylindrical region
of radius 6.0 cm. A straight wire carrying a
current of 25 A passes through the field as
shown in the accompanying figure. What is the
magnetic force on the wire?

85. A circular coil of wire of radius 5.0 cm has 20
turns and carries a current of 2.0 A. The coil lies
in a magnetic field of magnitude 0.50 T that is
directed parallel to the plane of the coil. (a) What
is the magnetic dipole moment of the coil? (b)
What is the torque on the coil?
86. A current-carrying coil in a magnetic field
experiences a torque that is 75% of the
maximum possible torque. What is the angle
between the magnetic field and the normal to
the plane of the coil?
87. A 4.0-cm by 6.0-cm rectangular current loop
carries a current of 10 A. What is the magnetic
dipole moment of the loop?
88. A circular coil with 200 turns has a radius of 2.0
cm. (a) What current through the coil results in a
magnetic dipole moment of 3.0 Am2? (b) What is
the maximum torque that the coil will
experience in a uniform field of strength
(c) If the angle between μ and B
is 45°, what is the magnitude of the torque on
the coil? (d) What is the magnetic potential
energy of coil for this orientation?
89. The current through a circular wire loop of radius
10 cm is 5.0 A. (a) Calculate the magnetic dipole
moment of the loop. (b) What is the torque on
the loop if it is in a uniform 0.20-T magnetic field
such that and B are directed at
to each
other? (c) For this position, what is the potential
energy of the dipole?

83. The current loop shown in the accompanying
figure lies in the plane of the page, as does the
magnetic field. Determine the net force and the
net torque on the loop if I = 10 A and B = 1.5 T.

90. A wire of length 1.0 m is wound into a singleturn planar loop. The loop carries a current of
5.0 A, and it is placed in a uniform magnetic field
of strength 0.25 T. (a) What is the maximum
torque that the loop will experience if it is
square? (b) If it is circular? (c) At what angle
relative to B would the normal to the circular coil
have to be oriented so that the torque on it
would be the same as the maximum torque on
the square coil?
91. Consider an electron rotating in a circular orbit
of radius r. Show that the magnitudes of the
magnetic dipole moment μ and the angular
momentum L of the electron are related by:

84. A circular coil of radius 5.0 cm is wound with five
turns and carries a current of 5.0 A. If the coil is
placed in a uniform magnetic field of strength
5.0 T, what is the maximum torque on it?

Access for free at openstax.org

92. The Hall effect is to be used to find the sign of
charge carriers in a semiconductor sample. The
probe is placed between the poles of a magnet
so that magnetic field is pointed up. A current is

11 • Chapter Review

passed through a rectangular sample placed
horizontally. As current is passed through the
sample in the east direction, the north side of
the sample is found to be at a higher potential
than the south side. Decide if the number
density of charge carriers is positively or
negatively charged.
93. The density of charge carriers for copper is
electrons per cubic meter. What
will be the Hall voltage reading from a probe
made up of
copper
plate when a current of 1.5 A is passed through
it in a magnetic field of 2.5 T perpendicular to
the
94. The Hall effect is to be used to find the density
of charge carriers in an unknown material. A Hall
voltage 40
for 3-A current is observed in a
3-T magnetic field for a rectangular sample with
length 2 cm, width 1.5 cm, and height 0.4 cm.
Determine the density of the charge carriers.
95. Show that the Hall voltage across wires made of
the same material, carrying identical currents,
and subjected to the same magnetic field is
inversely proportional to their diameters. (Hint:
Consider how drift velocity depends on wire
diameter.)
96. A velocity selector in a mass spectrometer uses
a 0.100-T magnetic field. (a) What electric field
strength is needed to select a speed of
(b) What is the voltage between
the plates if they are separated by 1.00 cm?
97. Find the radius of curvature of the path of a

499

25.0-MeV proton moving perpendicularly to the
1.20-T field of a cyclotron.
98. Unreasonable results To construct a nonmechanical water meter, a 0.500-T magnetic
field is placed across the supply water pipe to a
home and the Hall voltage is recorded. (a) Find
the flow rate through a 3.00-cm-diameter pipe if
the Hall voltage is 60.0 mV. (b) What would the
Hall voltage be for the same flow rate through a
10.0-cm-diameter pipe with the same field
applied?
99. Unreasonable results A charged particle having
mass
(that of a helium atom)
moving at
perpendicular to a
1.50-T magnetic field travels in a circular path of
radius 16.0 mm. (a) What is the charge of the
particle? (b) What is unreasonable about this
result? (c) Which assumptions are responsible?
100. Unreasonable results An inventor wants to
generate 120-V power by moving a 1.00-m-long
wire perpendicular to Earth’s
field. (a) Find the speed with which the wire
must move. (b) What is unreasonable about this
result? (c) Which assumption is responsible?
101. Unreasonable results Frustrated by the small
Hall voltage obtained in blood flow
measurements, a medical physicist decides to
increase the applied magnetic field strength to
get a 0.500-V output for blood moving at 30.0
cm/s in a 1.50-cm-diameter vessel. (a) What
magnetic field strength is needed? (b) What is
unreasonable about this result? (c) Which
premise is responsible?

Challenge Problems
102. A particle of charge +q and mass m moves with
velocity
pointed in the +y-direction as it
crosses the x-axis at x = R at a particular time.
There is a negative charge –Q fixed at the origin,
and there exists a uniform magnetic field
pointed in the +z-direction. It is found that the
particle describes a circle of radius R about –Q.
Find

in terms of the given quantities.

103. A proton of speed v =
enters a
region of uniform magnetic field of B = 0.5 T at
an angle of
to the magnetic field. In the
region of magnetic field proton describes a
helical path with radius R and pitch p (distance
between loops). Find R and p.

104. A particle’s path is bent when it passes through a
region of non-zero magnetic field although its
speed remains unchanged. This is very useful for
“beam steering” in particle accelerators.
Consider a proton of speed
entering
a region of uniform magnetic field 0.2 T over a
5-cm-wide region. Magnetic field is
perpendicular to the velocity of the particle. By
how much angle will the path of the proton be
bent? (Hint: The particle comes out tangent to a
circle.)

500

11 • Chapter Review

105. In a region a non-uniform magnetic field exists
such that
where
a is a constant. At some time t, a wire of length L
is carrying a current I is located along the x-axis
from origin to x = L. Find the magnetic force on
the wire at this instant in time.
106. A copper rod of mass m and length L is hung from
the ceiling using two springs of spring constant k. A
uniform magnetic field of magnitude
pointing
perpendicular to the rod and spring (coming into the
page in the figure) exists in a region of space
covering a length w of the copper rod. The ends of
the rod are then connected by flexible copper wire
across the terminals of a battery of voltage V.
Determine the change in the length of the springs
when a current I runs through the copper rod in the
direction shown in figure. (Ignore any force by the
flexible wire.)

108. A wire is made into a circular shape of radius R and
pivoted along a central support. The two ends of the
wire are touching a brush that is connected to a dc
power source. The structure is between the poles of
a magnet such that we can assume there is a
uniform magnetic field on the wire. In terms of a
coordinate system with origin at the center of the
ring, magnetic field is
and
the ring rotates about the z-axis. Find the torque on
the ring when it is not in the xz-plane.

109. A long-rigid wire lies along the x-axis and carries
a current of 2.5 A in the positive x-direction.
Around the wire is the magnetic field

107. The accompanied figure shows an arrangement
for measuring mass of ions by an instrument
called the mass spectrometer. An ion of mass m
and charge +q is produced essentially at rest in
source S, a chamber in which a gas discharge is
taking place. The ion is accelerated by a
potential difference
and allowed to enter a
region of constant magnetic field
In the
uniform magnetic field region, the ion moves in a
semicircular path striking a photographic plate
at a distance x from the entry point. Derive a
formula for mass m in terms of
q,
and
x.

Access for free at openstax.org

with x in meters and B in
millitesla. Calculate the magnetic force on the
segment of wire between x = 2.0 m and x = 4.0
m.
110. A circular loop of wire of area 10 cm2 carries a
current of 25 A. At a particular instant, the loop
lies in the xy-plane and is subjected to a
magnetic field
As
viewed from above the xy-plane, the current is
circulating clockwise. (a) What is the magnetic
dipole moment of the current loop? (b) At this
instant, what is the magnetic torque on the loop?

CHAPTER 12

Sources of Magnetic Fields

FIGURE 12.1 An external hard drive attached to a computer works by magnetically encoding information that can be stored or retrieved
quickly. A key idea in the development of digital devices is the ability to produce and use magnetic fields in this way. (credit: modification
of work by “Miss Karen”/Flickr)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
12.1 The Biot-Savart Law
12.2 Magnetic Field Due to a Thin Straight Wire
12.3 Magnetic Force between Two Parallel Currents
12.4 Magnetic Field of a Current Loop
12.5 Ampère’s Law
12.6 Solenoids and Toroids
12.7 Magnetism in Matter
INTRODUCTION In the preceding chapter, we saw that a moving charged particle produces a magnetic field. This
connection between electricity and magnetism is exploited in electromagnetic devices, such as a computer hard
drive. In fact, it is the underlying principle behind most of the technology in modern society, including telephones,
television, computers, and the internet.
In this chapter, we examine how magnetic fields are created by arbitrary distributions of electric current, using the
Biot-Savart law. Then we look at how current-carrying wires create magnetic fields and deduce the forces that arise
between two current-carrying wires due to these magnetic fields. We also study the torques produced by the
magnetic fields of current loops. We then generalize these results to an important law of electromagnetism, called
Ampère’s law.
We examine some devices that produce magnetic fields from currents in geometries based on loops, known as
solenoids and toroids. Finally, we look at how materials behave in magnetic fields and categorize materials based on
their responses to magnetic fields.

502

12 • Sources of Magnetic Fields

12.1 The Biot-Savart Law
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain how to derive a magnetic field from an arbitrary current in a line segment
• Calculate magnetic field from the Biot-Savart law in specific geometries, such as a current in a line and a
current in a circular arc
We have seen that mass produces a gravitational field and also interacts with that field. Charge produces an electric
field and also interacts with that field. Since moving charge (that is, current) interacts with a magnetic field, we
might expect that it also creates that field—and it does.
The equation used to calculate the magnetic field produced by a current is known as the Biot-Savart law. It is an
empirical law named in honor of two scientists who investigated the interaction between a straight, current-carrying
wire and a permanent magnet. This law enables us to calculate the magnitude and direction of the magnetic field
produced by a current in a wire. The Biot-Savart law states that at any point P (Figure 12.2), the magnetic field
due to an element

of a current-carrying wire is given by
12.1

FIGURE 12.2 A current element

The constant

produces a magnetic field at point P given by the Biot-Savart law.

is known as the permeability of free space and is exactly
12.2

in the SI system. The infinitesimal wire segment

is in the same direction as the current I (assumed positive), r is

the distance from

to P and

The direction of

is determined by applying the right-hand rule to the vector product

is a unit vector that points from

to P, as shown in the figure.
The magnitude of

is
12.3

where

is the angle between

and

Notice that if

then

The field produced by a current element

has no component parallel to
The magnetic field due to a finite length of current-carrying wire is found by integrating Equation 12.3 along the
wire, giving us the usual form of the Biot-Savart law.

Access for free at openstax.org

12.1 • The Biot-Savart Law

BIOT-SAVART LAW
The magnetic field

due to a current-carrying wire is found by
12.4

Since this is a vector integral, contributions from different current elements may not point in the same direction.
Consequently, the integral is often difficult to evaluate, even for fairly simple geometries. The following strategy may
be helpful.

PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Solving Biot-Savart Problems
To solve Biot-Savart law problems, the following steps are helpful:
1. Identify that the Biot-Savart law is the chosen method to solve the given problem. If there is symmetry in the
problem comparing and
discussed in Ampère’s Law.

Ampère’s law may be the preferred method to solve the question, which will be

2. Draw the current element length
and the unit vector noting that
points in the direction of the current
and points from the current element toward the point where the field is desired.
3. Calculate the cross product
The resultant vector gives the direction of the magnetic field according to
the Biot-Savart law.
4. Use Equation 12.4 and substitute all given quantities into the expression to solve for the magnetic field. Note
all variables that remain constant over the entire length of the wire may be factored out of the integration.
5. Use the right-hand rule to verify the direction of the magnetic field produced from the current or to write down
the direction of the magnetic field if only the magnitude was solved for in the previous part.

EXAMPLE 12.1
Calculating Magnetic Fields of Short Current Segments
A short wire of length 1.0 cm carries a current of 2.0 A in the vertical direction (Figure 12.3). The rest of the wire is
shielded so it does not add to the magnetic field produced by the wire. Calculate the magnetic field at point P, which
is 1 meter from the wire in the x-direction.

FIGURE 12.3 A small line segment carries a current I in the vertical direction. What is the magnetic field at a distance x from the segment?

Strategy
We can determine the magnetic field at point P using the Biot-Savart law. Since the current segment is much smaller

503

504

12 • Sources of Magnetic Fields

than the distance x, we can drop the integral from the expression. The integration is converted back into a
summation, but only for small dl, which we now write as
Another way to think about it is that each of the radius
values is nearly the same, no matter where the current element is on the line segment, if
is small compared to x.
The angle is calculated using a tangent function. Using the numbers given, we can calculate the magnetic field at
P.
Solution
The angle between

and

is calculated from trigonometry, knowing the distances l and x from the problem:

The magnetic field at point P is calculated by the Biot-Savart law:

From the right-hand rule and the Biot-Savart law, the field is directed into the page.
Significance
This approximation is only good if the length of the line segment is very small compared to the distance from the
current element to the point. If not, the integral form of the Biot-Savart law must be used over the entire line
segment to calculate the magnetic field.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.1
Using Example 12.1, at what distance would P have to be to measure a magnetic field half of the given answer?

EXAMPLE 12.2
Calculating Magnetic Field of a Circular Arc of Wire
A wire carries a current I in a circular arc with radius R swept through an arbitrary angle
the magnetic field at the center of this arc at point P.

FIGURE 12.4 A wire segment carrying a current I. The path

and radial direction

(Figure 12.4). Calculate

are indicated.

Strategy
We can determine the magnetic field at point P using the Biot-Savart law. The radial and path length directions are
always at a right angle, so the cross product turns into multiplication. We also know that the distance along the path
dl is related to the radius times the angle (in radians). Then we can pull all constants out of the integration and
solve for the magnetic field.
Solution
The Biot-Savart law starts with the following equation:

Access for free at openstax.org

12.2 • Magnetic Field Due to a Thin Straight Wire

As we integrate along the arc, all the contributions to the magnetic field are in the same direction (out of the page),
so we can work with the magnitude of the field. The cross product turns into multiplication because the path dl and
the radial direction are perpendicular. We can also substitute the arc length formula,
:

The current and radius can be pulled out of the integral because they are the same regardless of where we are on
the path. This leaves only the integral over the angle,

The angle varies on the wire from 0 to ; hence, the result is

Significance
The direction of the magnetic field at point P is determined by the right-hand rule, as shown in the previous chapter.
If there are other wires in the diagram along with the arc, and you are asked to find the net magnetic field, find each
contribution from a wire or arc and add the results by superposition of vectors. Make sure to pay attention to the
direction of each contribution. Also note that in a symmetric situation, like a straight or circular wire, contributions
from opposite sides of point P cancel each other.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.2
The wire loop forms a full circle of radius R and current I. What is the magnitude of the magnetic field at the center?

12.2 Magnetic Field Due to a Thin Straight Wire
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain how the Biot-Savart law is used to determine the magnetic field due to a thin, straight wire.
• Determine the dependence of the magnetic field from a thin, straight wire based on the distance from it
and the current flowing in the wire.
• Sketch the magnetic field created from a thin, straight wire by using the second right-hand rule.
How much current is needed to produce a significant magnetic field, perhaps as strong as Earth’s field? Surveyors
will tell you that overhead electric power lines create magnetic fields that interfere with their compass readings.
Indeed, when Oersted discovered in 1820 that a current in a wire affected a compass needle, he was not dealing
with extremely large currents. How does the shape of wires carrying current affect the shape of the magnetic field
created? We noted in Magnetic Forces and Fields that a current loop created a magnetic field similar to that of a bar
magnet, but what about a straight wire? We can use the Biot-Savart law to answer all of these questions, including
determining the magnetic field of a long straight wire.
Figure 12.5 shows a section of an infinitely long, straight wire that carries a current I. What is the magnetic field at a
point P, located a distance R from the wire?

505

506

12 • Sources of Magnetic Fields

FIGURE 12.5 A section of a thin, straight current-carrying wire. The independent variable

has the limits

and

Let’s begin by considering the magnetic field due to the current element
located at the position x. Using the
right-hand rule 1 from the previous chapter,
points out of the page for any element along the wire. At point
P, therefore, the magnetic fields due to all current elements have the same direction. This means that we can
calculate the net field there by evaluating the scalar sum of the contributions of the elements. With
we have from the Biot-Savart law
12.5

The wire is symmetrical about point O, so we can set the limits of the integration from zero to infinity and double the
answer, rather than integrate from negative infinity to positive infinity. Based on the picture and geometry, we can
write expressions for r and
in terms of x and R, namely:

Substituting these expressions into Equation 12.5, the magnetic field integration becomes

∞

12.6

Evaluating the integral yields

∞

12.7

Substituting the limits gives us the solution
12.8

The magnetic field lines of the infinite wire are circular and centered at the wire (Figure 12.6), and they are identical
in every plane perpendicular to the wire. Since the field decreases with distance from the wire, the spacing of the
field lines must increase correspondingly with distance. The direction of this magnetic field may be found with a
second form of the right-hand rule (illustrated in Figure 12.6). If you hold the wire with your right hand so that your
thumb points along the current, then your fingers wrap around the wire in the same sense as

Access for free at openstax.org

12.2 • Magnetic Field Due to a Thin Straight Wire

FIGURE 12.6 Some magnetic field lines of an infinite wire. The direction of

can be found with a form of the right-hand rule.

The direction of the field lines can be observed experimentally by placing several small compass needles on a circle
near the wire, as illustrated in Figure 12.7. When there is no current in the wire, the needles align with Earth’s
magnetic field. However, when a large current is sent through the wire, the compass needles all point tangent to the
circle. Iron filings sprinkled on a horizontal surface also delineate the field lines, as shown in Figure 12.7.

FIGURE 12.7 The shape of the magnetic field lines of a long wire can be seen using (a) small compass needles and (b) iron filings.

EXAMPLE 12.3
Calculating Magnetic Field Due to Three Wires
Three wires sit at the corners of a square, all carrying currents of 2 amps into the page as shown in Figure 12.8.
Calculate the magnitude of the magnetic field at the other corner of the square, point P, if the length of each side of
the square is 1 cm.

FIGURE 12.8 Three wires have current flowing into the page. The magnetic field is determined at the fourth corner of the square.

Strategy
The magnetic field due to each wire at the desired point is calculated. The diagonal distance is calculated using the
Pythagorean theorem. Next, the direction of each magnetic field’s contribution is determined by drawing a circle
centered at the point of the wire and out toward the desired point. The direction of the magnetic field contribution

507

508

12 • Sources of Magnetic Fields

from that wire is tangential to the curve. Lastly, working with these vectors, the resultant is calculated.
Solution
Wires 1 and 3 both have the same magnitude of magnetic field contribution at point P:

Wire 2 has a longer distance and a magnetic field contribution at point P of:

The vectors for each of these magnetic field contributions are shown.

The magnetic field in the x-direction has contributions from wire 3 and the x-component of wire 2:

The y-component is similarly the contributions from wire 1 and the y-component of wire 2:

Therefore, the net magnetic field is the resultant of these two components:

Significance
The geometry in this problem results in the magnetic field contributions in the x- and y-directions having the same
magnitude. This is not necessarily the case if the currents were different values or if the wires were located in
different positions. Regardless of the numerical results, working on the components of the vectors will yield the
resulting magnetic field at the point in need.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.3
Using Example 12.3, keeping the currents the same in wires 1 and 3, what should the current be in wire 2 to
counteract the magnetic fields from wires 1 and 3 so that there is no net magnetic field at point P?

Access for free at openstax.org

12.3 • Magnetic Force between Two Parallel Currents

12.3 Magnetic Force between Two Parallel Currents
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain how parallel wires carrying currents can attract or repel each other
• Define the ampere and describe how it is related to current-carrying wires
• Calculate the force of attraction or repulsion between two current-carrying wires
You might expect that two current-carrying wires generate significant forces between them, since ordinary currents
produce magnetic fields and these fields exert significant forces on ordinary currents. But you might not expect that
the force between wires is used to define the ampere. It might also surprise you to learn that this force has
something to do with why large circuit breakers burn up when they attempt to interrupt large currents.
The force between two long, straight, and parallel conductors separated by a distance r can be found by applying
what we have developed in the preceding sections. Figure 12.9 shows the wires, their currents, the field created by
one wire, and the consequent force the other wire experiences from the created field. Let us consider the field
produced by wire 1 and the force it exerts on wire 2 (call the force
). The field due to
at a distance r is
12.9

FIGURE 12.9 (a) The magnetic field produced by a long straight conductor is perpendicular to a parallel conductor, as indicated by righthand rule (RHR)-2. (b) A view from above of the two wires shown in (a), with one magnetic field line shown for wire 1. RHR-1 shows that the
force between the parallel conductors is attractive when the currents are in the same direction. A similar analysis shows that the force is
repulsive between currents in opposite directions.

This field is uniform from the wire 1 and perpendicular to it, so the force
by
with

it exerts on a length l of wire 2 is given
12.10

The forces on the wires are equal in magnitude, so we just write F for the magnitude of
(Note that
Since the wires are very long, it is convenient to think in terms of F/l, the force per unit length. Substituting the
expression for
into Equation 12.10 and rearranging terms gives

)

12.11

The ratio F/l is the force per unit length between two parallel currents
and
separated by a distance r. The force
is attractive if the currents are in the same direction and repulsive if they are in opposite directions.
This force is responsible for the pinch effect in electric arcs and other plasmas. The force exists whether the
currents are in wires or not. It is only apparent if the overall charge density is zero; otherwise, the Coulomb repulsion
overwhelms the magnetic attraction. In an electric arc, where charges are moving parallel to one another, an
attractive force squeezes currents into a smaller tube. In large circuit breakers, such as those used in neighborhood
power distribution systems, the pinch effect can concentrate an arc between plates of a switch trying to break a

509

510

12 • Sources of Magnetic Fields

large current, burn holes, and even ignite the equipment. Another example of the pinch effect is found in the solar
plasma, where jets of ionized material, such as solar flares, are shaped by magnetic forces.
The definition of the ampere is based on the force between current-carrying wires. Note that for long, parallel wires
separated by 1 meter with each carrying 1 ampere, the force per meter is
12.12
Since

is exactly
by definition, and because
This is the basis of the definition of the ampere.

the force per meter is exactly

Infinite-length wires are impractical, so in practice, a current balance is constructed with coils of wire separated by
a few centimeters. Force is measured to determine current. This also provides us with a method for measuring the
coulomb. We measure the charge that flows for a current of one ampere in one second. That is,
For
both the ampere and the coulomb, the method of measuring force between conductors is the most accurate in
practice.

EXAMPLE 12.4
Calculating Forces on Wires
Two wires, both carrying current out of the page, have a current of magnitude 5.0 mA. The first wire is located at (0.0
cm, 3.0 cm) while the other wire is located at (4.0 cm, 0.0 cm) as shown in Figure 12.10. What is the magnetic force
per unit length of the first wire on the second and the second wire on the first?

FIGURE 12.10 Two current-carrying wires at given locations with currents out of the page.

Strategy
Each wire produces a magnetic field felt by the other wire. The distance along the hypotenuse of the triangle
between the wires is the radial distance used in the calculation to determine the force per unit length. Since both
wires have currents flowing in the same direction, the direction of the force is toward each other.
Solution
The distance between the wires results from finding the hypotenuse of a triangle:

The force per unit length can then be calculated using the known currents in the wires:

The force from the first wire pulls the second wire. The angle between the radius and the x-axis is

The unit vector for this is calculated by

Therefore, the force per unit length from wire one on wire 2 is

Access for free at openstax.org

12.4 • Magnetic Field of a Current Loop

The force per unit length from wire 2 on wire 1 is the negative of the previous answer:

Significance
These wires produced magnetic fields of equal magnitude but opposite directions at each other’s locations.
Whether the fields are identical or not, the forces that the wires exert on each other are always equal in magnitude
and opposite in direction (Newton’s third law).

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.4
Two wires, both carrying current out of the page, have a current of magnitude 2.0 mA and 3.0 mA, respectively. The
first wire is located at (0.0 cm, 5.0 cm) while the other wire is located at (12.0 cm, 0.0 cm). What is the magnitude of
the magnetic force per unit length of the first wire on the second and the second wire on the first?

12.4 Magnetic Field of a Current Loop
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain how the Biot-Savart law is used to determine the magnetic field due to a current in a loop of wire
at a point along a line perpendicular to the plane of the loop.
• Determine the magnetic field of an arc of current.
The circular loop of Figure 12.11 has a radius R, carries a current I, and lies in the xz-plane. What is the magnetic
field due to the current at an arbitrary point P along the axis of the loop?

511

512

12 • Sources of Magnetic Fields

FIGURE 12.11 Determining the magnetic field at point P along the axis of a current-carrying loop of wire.

We can use the Biot-Savart law to find the magnetic field due to a current. We first consider arbitrary segments on
opposite sides of the loop to qualitatively show by the vector results that the net magnetic field direction is along the
central axis from the loop. From there, we can use the Biot-Savart law to derive the expression for magnetic field.
Let P be a distance y from the center of the loop. From the right-hand rule, the magnetic field
the current element
is directed at an angle above the y-axis as shown. Since
and is in the yz-plane, the two vectors are perpendicular, so we have

at P, produced by

is parallel along the x-axis
12.13

where we have used
Now consider the magnetic field
The magnitude of

due to the current element

which is directly opposite

is also given by Equation 12.13, but it is directed at an angle

on the loop.

below the y-axis. The

components of
and
perpendicular to the y-axis therefore cancel, and in calculating the net magnetic field,
only the components along the y-axis need to be considered. The components perpendicular to the axis of the loop
sum to zero in pairs. Hence at point P:
12.14

For all elements

on the wire, y, R, and

are constant and are related by

Now from Equation 12.14, the magnetic field at P is

Access for free at openstax.org

12.4 • Magnetic Field of a Current Loop

12.15

where we have used

As discussed in the previous chapter, the closed current loop is a magnetic

dipole of moment

For this example,

and

so the magnetic field at P can also be written as
12.16

By setting

in Equation 12.15, we obtain the magnetic field at the center of the loop:
12.17

for a flat coil of N loops per length. It can also be expressed as

This equation becomes

12.18
If we consider
a dipole:

in Equation 12.16, the expression reduces to an expression known as the magnetic field from
12.19

The calculation of the magnetic field due to the circular current loop at points off-axis requires rather complex
mathematics, so we’ll just look at the results. The magnetic field lines are shaped as shown in Figure 12.12. Notice
that one field line follows the axis of the loop. This is the field line we just found. Also, very close to the wire, the
field lines are almost circular, like the lines of a long straight wire.

FIGURE 12.12 Sketch of the magnetic field lines of a circular current loop.

EXAMPLE 12.5
Magnetic Field between Two Loops
Two loops of wire carry the same current of 10 mA, but flow in opposite directions as seen in Figure 12.13. One loop
is measured to have a radius of
while the other loop has a radius of
The distance from the
first loop to the point where the magnetic field is measured is 0.25 m, and the distance from that point to the
second loop is 0.75 m. What is the magnitude of the net magnetic field at point P?

513

514

12 • Sources of Magnetic Fields

FIGURE 12.13 Two loops of different radii have the same current but flowing in opposite directions. The magnetic field at point P is
measured to be zero.

Strategy
The magnetic field at point P has been determined in Equation 12.15. Since the currents are flowing in opposite
directions, the net magnetic field is the difference between the two fields generated by the coils. Using the given
quantities in the problem, the net magnetic field is then calculated.
Solution
Solving for the net magnetic field using Equation 12.15 and the given quantities in the problem yields

Significance
Helmholtz coils typically have loops with equal radii with current flowing in the same direction to have a strong
uniform field at the midpoint between the loops. A similar application of the magnetic field distribution created by
Helmholtz coils is found in a magnetic bottle that can temporarily trap charged particles. See Magnetic Forces and
Fields for a discussion on this.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.5
Using Example 12.5, at what distance would you have to move the first coil to have zero measurable magnetic field
at point P?

12.5 Ampère’s Law
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain how Ampère’s law relates the magnetic field produced by a current to the value of the current
• Calculate the magnetic field from a long straight wire, either thin or thick, by Ampère’s law

Access for free at openstax.org

12.5 • Ampère’s Law

A fundamental property of a static magnetic field is that, unlike an electrostatic field, it is not conservative. A
conservative vector field is one whose line integral between two end points is the same regardless of the path
chosen. Magnetic fields do not have such a property. Instead, there is a relationship between the magnetic field and
its source, electric current. It is expressed in terms of the line integral of and is known as Ampère’s law. This law
can also be derived directly from the Biot-Savart law. We now consider that derivation for the special case of an
infinite, straight wire.
Figure 12.14 shows an arbitrary plane perpendicular to an infinite, straight wire whose current I is directed out of
the page. The magnetic field lines are circles directed counterclockwise and centered on the wire. To begin, let’s
consider

over the closed paths M and N. Notice that one path (M) encloses the wire, whereas the other (N)

does not. Since the field lines are circular,
through

is the product of B and the projection of dl onto the circle passing

If the radius of this particular circle is r, the projection is

and

FIGURE 12.14 The current I of a long, straight wire is directed out of the page. The integral

equals

and 0, respectively, for paths M

and N.

With

given by Equation 12.9,
12.20

For path M, which circulates around the wire,

and
12.21

Path N, on the other hand, circulates through both positive (counterclockwise) and negative (clockwise)
Figure 12.14), and since it is closed,

(see

Thus for path N,
12.22

515

516

12 • Sources of Magnetic Fields

The extension of this result to the general case is Ampère’s law.

AMPÈRE’S LAW
Over an arbitrary closed path,
12.23
where I is the total current passing through any open surface S whose perimeter is the path of integration. Only
currents inside the path of integration need be considered.
To determine whether a specific current I is positive or negative, curl the fingers of your right hand in the direction of
the path of integration, as shown in Figure 12.14. If I passes through S in the same direction as your extended
thumb, I is positive; if I passes through S in the direction opposite to your extended thumb, it is negative.

PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Ampère’s Law
To calculate the magnetic field created from current in wire(s), use the following steps:
1. Identify the symmetry of the current in the wire(s). If there is no symmetry, use the Biot-Savart law to
determine the magnetic field.
2. Determine the direction of the magnetic field created by the wire(s) by right-hand rule 2.
3. Choose a path loop where the magnetic field is either constant or zero.
4. Calculate the current inside the loop.
5. Calculate the line integral
6. Equate

with

around the closed loop.
and solve for

EXAMPLE 12.6
Using Ampère’s Law to Calculate the Magnetic Field Due to a Wire
Use Ampère’s law to calculate the magnetic field due to a steady current I in an infinitely long, thin, straight wire as
shown in Figure 12.15.

Access for free at openstax.org

12.5 • Ampère’s Law

FIGURE 12.15 The possible components of the magnetic field B due to a current I, which is directed out of the page. The field has no radial
component, so there is no radial contribution to the integral.

Strategy
Consider an arbitrary plane perpendicular to the wire, with the current directed out of the page. The possible
magnetic field components in this plane,
and
are shown at arbitrary points on a circle of radius r centered on
the wire. Since the field is cylindrically symmetric, neither
nor
varies with the position on this circle. Also from
symmetry, the radial lines, if they exist, must be directed either all inward or all outward from the wire. This would
mean, however, that there must be a net magnetic flux across an arbitrary cylinder concentric with the wire.
However, because magnetic field lines are continuous, forming closed loops without a beginning or end (see the
discussion in Magnetic Fields and Lines) the net magnetic flux through any closed test surface must be zero. We can
therefore conclude that the radial component of the magnetic field must be zero. Therefore, we can apply Ampère’s
law to the circular path as shown.
Solution
Over this path

is constant and parallel to

so

Thus Ampère’s law reduces to

Finally, since

is the only component of

we can drop the subscript and write

This agrees with the Biot-Savart calculation above.
Significance
Ampère’s law works well if you have a path to integrate over which
has results that are easy to simplify. For
the infinite wire, this works easily with a path that is circular around the wire so that the magnetic field factors out of
the integration. If the path dependence looks complicated, you can always go back to the Biot-Savart law and use
that to find the magnetic field.

517

518

12 • Sources of Magnetic Fields

EXAMPLE 12.7
Calculating the Magnetic Field of a Thick Wire with Ampère’s Law
The radius of the long, straight wire of Figure 12.16 is a, and the wire carries a current
that is distributed
uniformly over its cross-section. Find the magnetic field both inside and outside the wire.

FIGURE 12.16 (a) A model of a current-carrying wire of radius a and current
and the Ampère’s loop of radius r.

(b) A cross-section of the same wire showing the radius a

Strategy
This problem has the same geometry as Example 12.6, but the enclosed current changes as we move the
integration path from outside the wire to inside the wire, where it doesn’t capture the entire current enclosed (see
Figure 12.16).
Solution
For any circular path of radius r that is centered on the wire,

From Ampère’s law, this equals the total current passing through any surface bounded by the path of integration.
Consider first a circular path that is inside the wire
such as that shown in part (a) of Figure 12.16. We need
the current I passing through the area enclosed by the path. It’s equal to the current density J times the area
enclosed. Since the current is uniform, the current density inside the path equals the current density in the whole
wire, which is
Therefore the current I passing through the area enclosed by the path is

We can consider this ratio because the current density J is constant over the area of the wire. Therefore, the current
density of a part of the wire is equal to the current density in the whole area. Using Ampère’s law, we obtain

and the magnetic field inside the wire is

Outside the wire, the situation is identical to that of the infinite thin wire of the previous example; that is,

The variation of B with r is shown in Figure 12.17.

Access for free at openstax.org

12.5 • Ampère’s Law

FIGURE 12.17 Variation of the magnetic field produced by a current

in a long, straight wire of radius a.

Significance
The results show that as the radial distance increases inside the thick wire, the magnetic field increases from zero to
a familiar value of the magnetic field of a thin wire. Outside the wire, the field drops off regardless of whether it was
a thick or thin wire.
This result is similar to how Gauss’s law for electrical charges behaves inside a uniform charge distribution, except
that Gauss’s law for electrical charges has a uniform volume distribution of charge, whereas Ampère’s law here has
a uniform area of current distribution. Also, the drop-off outside the thick wire is similar to how an electric field
drops off outside of a linear charge distribution, since the two cases have the same geometry and neither case
depends on the configuration of charges or currents once the loop is outside the distribution.

EXAMPLE 12.8
Using Ampère’s Law with Arbitrary Paths
Use Ampère’s law to evaluate

for the current configurations and paths in Figure 12.18.

FIGURE 12.18 Current configurations and paths for Example 12.8.

519

520

12 • Sources of Magnetic Fields

Strategy
Ampère’s law states that

where I is the total current passing through the enclosed loop. The

quickest way to evaluate the integral is to calculate
by finding the net current through the loop. Positive
currents flow with your right-hand thumb if your fingers wrap around in the direction of the loop. This will tell us the
sign of the answer.
Solution
(a) The current going downward through the loop equals the current going out of the loop, so the net current is zero.
Thus,
(b) The only current to consider in this problem is 2A because it is the only current inside the loop. The right-hand
rule shows us the current going downward through the loop is in the positive direction. Therefore, the answer is

(c) The right-hand rule shows us the current going downward through the loop is in the positive direction. There are
of current going downward and –3 A going upward. Therefore, the total current is 9 A and

Significance
If the currents all wrapped around so that the same current went into the loop and out of the loop, the net current
would be zero and no magnetic field would be present. This is why wires are very close to each other in an electrical
cord. The currents flowing toward a device and away from a device in a wire equal zero total current flow through an
Ampère loop around these wires. Therefore, no stray magnetic fields can be present from cords carrying current.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.6
Consider using Ampère’s law to calculate the magnetic fields of a finite straight wire and of a circular loop of wire.
Why is it not useful for these calculations?

12.6 Solenoids and Toroids
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Establish a relationship for how the magnetic field of a solenoid varies with distance and current by using
both the Biot-Savart law and Ampère’s law
• Establish a relationship for how the magnetic field of a toroid varies with distance and current by using
Ampère’s law
Two of the most common and useful electromagnetic devices are called solenoids and toroids. In one form or
another, they are part of numerous instruments, both large and small. In this section, we examine the magnetic field
typical of these devices.

Solenoids
A long wire wound in the form of a helical coil is known as a solenoid. Solenoids are commonly used in experimental
research requiring magnetic fields. A solenoid is generally easy to wind, and near its center, its magnetic field is
quite uniform and directly proportional to the current in the wire.
Figure 12.19 shows a solenoid consisting of N turns of wire tightly wound over a length L. A current I is flowing along
the wire of the solenoid. The number of turns per unit length is N/L; therefore, the number of turns in an infinitesimal
length dy are (N/L)dy turns. This produces a current

Access for free at openstax.org

12.6 • Solenoids and Toroids

12.24
We first calculate the magnetic field at the point P of Figure 12.19. This point is on the central axis of the solenoid.
We are basically cutting the solenoid into thin slices that are dy thick and treating each as a current loop. Thus, dI is
the current through each slice. The magnetic field
Equation 12.15 and Equation 12.24:

due to the current dI in dy can be found with the help of
12.25

where we used Equation 12.24 to replace dI. The resultant field at P is found by integrating
along the entire
length of the solenoid. It’s easiest to evaluate this integral by changing the independent variable from y to From
inspection of Figure 12.19, we have:
12.26

FIGURE 12.19 (a) A solenoid is a long wire wound in the shape of a helix. (b) The magnetic field at the point P on the axis of the solenoid is
the net field due to all of the current loops.

Taking the differential of both sides of this equation, we obtain

521

522

12 • Sources of Magnetic Fields

When this is substituted into the equation for

we have
12.27

which is the magnetic field along the central axis of a finite solenoid.
Of special interest is the infinitely long solenoid, for which
solenoid is one whose length is much larger than its radius

∞ From a practical point of view, the infinite
In this case,

and

Then from

Equation 12.27, the magnetic field along the central axis of an infinite solenoid is

or
12.28
where n is the number of turns per unit length. You can find the direction of with a right-hand rule: Curl your
fingers in the direction of the current, and your thumb points along the magnetic field in the interior of the solenoid.
We now use these properties, along with Ampère’s law, to calculate the magnitude of the magnetic field at any
location inside the infinite solenoid. Consider the closed path of Figure 12.20. Along segment 1,

is uniform and

parallel to the path as shown in Equation 12.28. Along segments 2 and 4, is perpendicular to part of the path and
vanishes over the rest of it. Therefore, segments 2 and 4 do not contribute to the line integral in Ampère’s law. Along
segment 3,
because the magnetic field is zero outside the solenoid. If you consider an Ampère’s law loop
outside of the solenoid, the current flows in opposite directions on different segments of the loop. Therefore, there
is no enclosed current and no magnetic field according to Ampère’s law. Thus, there is no contribution to the line
integral from segment 3. As a result, we find
12.29

FIGURE 12.20 The path of integration used in Ampère’s law to evaluate the magnetic field of an infinite solenoid.

The solenoid has n turns per unit length, so the current that passes through the surface enclosed by the path is
Therefore, from Ampère’s law,

.

and
12.30
within the solenoid. This agrees with what we found earlier for B on the central axis of the solenoid. Here, however,
the location of segment 1 is arbitrary, so we have found that this equation gives the magnetic field everywhere
inside the infinite solenoid.

Access for free at openstax.org

12.6 • Solenoids and Toroids

When a patient undergoes a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan, the person lies down on a table that is moved
into the center of a large solenoid that can generate very large magnetic fields. The solenoid is capable of these high
fields from high currents flowing through superconducting wires. The large magnetic field is used to change the spin
of protons in the patient’s body. The time it takes for the spins to align or relax (return to original orientation) is a
signature of different tissues that can be analyzed to see if the structures of the tissues is normal (Figure 12.21).

FIGURE 12.21 In an MRI machine, a large magnetic field is generated by the cylindrical solenoid surrounding the patient. (credit: Liz West)

EXAMPLE 12.9
Magnetic Field Inside a Solenoid
A solenoid has 300 turns wound around a cylinder of diameter 1.20 cm and length 14.0 cm. If the current through
the coils is 0.410 A, what is the magnitude of the magnetic field inside and near the middle of the solenoid?
Strategy
We are given the number of turns and the length of the solenoid so we can find the number of turns per unit length.
Therefore, the magnetic field inside and near the middle of the solenoid is given by Equation 12.30. Outside the
solenoid, the magnetic field is zero.
Solution
The number of turns per unit length is

The magnetic field produced inside the solenoid is

Significance
This solution is valid only if the length of the solenoid is reasonably large compared with its diameter. This example
is a case where this is valid.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.7
What is the ratio of the magnetic field produced from using a finite formula over the infinite approximation for an
angle of (a)
(b)
The solenoid has 1000 turns in 50 cm with a current of 1.0 A flowing through the coils

523

524

12 • Sources of Magnetic Fields

Toroids
A toroid is a donut-shaped coil closely wound with one continuous wire, as illustrated in part (a) of Figure 12.22. If
the toroid has N windings and the current in the wire is I, what is the magnetic field both inside and outside the
toroid?

FIGURE 12.22 (a) A toroid is a coil wound into a donut-shaped object. (b) A loosely wound toroid does not have cylindrical symmetry. (c) In
a tightly wound toroid, cylindrical symmetry is a very good approximation. (d) Several paths of integration for Ampère’s law.

We begin by assuming cylindrical symmetry around the axis OO’. Actually, this assumption is not precisely correct,
for as part (b) of Figure 12.22 shows, the view of the toroidal coil varies from point to point (for example,
and
) on a circular path centered around OO’. However, if the toroid is tightly wound, all points on the circle
become essentially equivalent [part (c) of Figure 12.22], and cylindrical symmetry is an accurate approximation.
With this symmetry, the magnetic field must be tangent to and constant in magnitude along any circular path
centered on OO’. This allows us to write for each of the paths
and
shown in part (d) of Figure 12.22,
12.31
Ampère’s law relates this integral to the net current passing through any surface bounded by the path of integration.
For a path that is external to the toroid, either no current passes through the enclosing surface (path
), or the
current passing through the surface in one direction is exactly balanced by the current passing through it in the
opposite direction
In either case, there is no net current passing through the surface, so

and

12.32

The turns of a toroid form a helix, rather than circular loops. As a result, there is a small field external to the coil;
however, the derivation above holds if the coils were circular.
For a circular path within the toroid (path
), the current in the wire cuts the surface N times, resulting in a net
current NI through the surface. We now find with Ampère’s law,

Access for free at openstax.org

12.7 • Magnetism in Matter

and
12.33

The magnetic field is directed in the counterclockwise direction for the windings shown. When the current in the
coils is reversed, the direction of the magnetic field also reverses.
The magnetic field inside a toroid is not uniform, as it varies inversely with the distance r from the axis OO’. However,
if the central radius R (the radius midway between the inner and outer radii of the toroid) is much larger than the
cross-sectional diameter of the coils r, the variation is fairly small, and the magnitude of the magnetic field may be
calculated by Equation 12.33 where

12.7 Magnetism in Matter
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Classify magnetic materials as paramagnetic, diamagnetic, or ferromagnetic, based on their response to
a magnetic field
• Sketch how magnetic dipoles align with the magnetic field in each type of substance
• Define hysteresis and magnetic susceptibility, which determines the type of magnetic material
Why are certain materials magnetic and others not? And why do certain substances become magnetized by a field,
whereas others are unaffected? To answer such questions, we need an understanding of magnetism on a
microscopic level.
Within an atom, every electron travels in an orbit and spins on an internal axis. Both types of motion produce current
loops and therefore magnetic dipoles. For a particular atom, the net magnetic dipole moment is the vector sum of
the magnetic dipole moments. Values of for several types of atoms are given in Table 12.1. Notice that some
atoms have a zero net dipole moment and that the magnitudes of the nonvanishing moments are typically

Atom

Magnetic Moment

H

9.27

He

0

Li

9.27

O

13.9

Na

9.27

S

13.9

TABLE 12.1 Magnetic Moments of Some Atoms

A handful of matter has approximately
atoms and ions, each with its magnetic dipole moment. If no external
magnetic field is present, the magnetic dipoles are randomly oriented—as many are pointed up as down, as many
are pointed east as west, and so on. Consequently, the net magnetic dipole moment of the sample is zero. However,
if the sample is placed in a magnetic field, these dipoles tend to align with the field (see Equation 12.14), and this
alignment determines how the sample responds to the field. On the basis of this response, a material is said to be
either paramagnetic, ferromagnetic, or diamagnetic.
In a paramagnetic material, only a small fraction (roughly one-third) of the magnetic dipoles are aligned with the

525

526

12 • Sources of Magnetic Fields

applied field. Since each dipole produces its own magnetic field, this alignment contributes an extra magnetic field,
which enhances the applied field. When a ferromagnetic material is placed in a magnetic field, its magnetic dipoles
also become aligned; furthermore, they become locked together so that a permanent magnetization results, even
when the field is turned off or reversed. This permanent magnetization happens in ferromagnetic materials but not
paramagnetic materials. Diamagnetic materials are composed of atoms that have no net magnetic dipole moment.
However, when a diamagnetic material is placed in a magnetic field, a magnetic dipole moment is directed opposite
to the applied field and therefore produces a magnetic field that opposes the applied field. We now consider each
type of material in greater detail.

Paramagnetic Materials
For simplicity, we assume our sample is a long, cylindrical piece that completely fills the interior of a long, tightly
wound solenoid. When there is no current in the solenoid, the magnetic dipoles in the sample are randomly oriented
and produce no net magnetic field. With a solenoid current, the magnetic field due to the solenoid exerts a torque on
the dipoles that tends to align them with the field. In competition with the aligning torque are thermal collisions that
tend to randomize the orientations of the dipoles. The relative importance of these two competing processes can be
estimated by comparing the energies involved. From Equation 12.14, the energy difference between a magnetic
dipole aligned with and against a magnetic field is
If
(the value of atomic
hydrogen) and B = 1.0 T, then

At a room temperature of

the thermal energy per atom is

which is about 220 times greater than
Clearly, energy exchanges in thermal collisions can seriously interfere
with the alignment of the magnetic dipoles. As a result, only a small fraction of the dipoles is aligned at any instant.
The four sketches of Figure 12.23 furnish a simple model of this alignment process. In part (a), before the field of
the solenoid (not shown) containing the paramagnetic sample is applied, the magnetic dipoles are randomly
oriented and there is no net magnetic dipole moment associated with the material. With the introduction of the field,
a partial alignment of the dipoles takes place, as depicted in part (b). The component of the net magnetic dipole
moment that is perpendicular to the field vanishes. We may then represent the sample by part (c), which shows a
collection of magnetic dipoles completely aligned with the field. By treating these dipoles as current loops, we can
picture the dipole alignment as equivalent to a current around the surface of the material, as in part (d). This
fictitious surface current produces its own magnetic field, which enhances the field of the solenoid.

Access for free at openstax.org

12.7 • Magnetism in Matter

FIGURE 12.23 The alignment process in a paramagnetic material filling a solenoid (not shown). (a) Without an applied field, the magnetic
dipoles are randomly oriented. (b) With a field, partial alignment occurs. (c) An equivalent representation of part (b). (d) The internal
currents cancel, leaving an effective surface current that produces a magnetic field similar to that of a finite solenoid.

We can express the total magnetic field

in the material as
12.34

where

is the field due to the current

the sample. Now

in the solenoid and

is usually proportional to

is the field due to the surface current

around

a fact we express by
12.35

where is a dimensionless quantity called the magnetic susceptibility. Values of for some paramagnetic
materials are given in Table 12.2. Since the alignment of magnetic dipoles is so weak, is very small for
paramagnetic materials. By combining Equation 12.34 and Equation 12.35, we obtain:
12.36
For a sample within an infinite solenoid, this becomes

12.37

This expression tells us that the insertion of a paramagnetic material into a solenoid increases the field by a factor of
However, since is so small, the field isn’t enhanced very much.
The quantity
12.38
is called the magnetic permeability of a material. In terms of

Equation 12.37 can be written as
12.39

for the filled solenoid.

527

528

12 • Sources of Magnetic Fields

Paramagnetic Materials

Diamagnetic Materials

Aluminum

Bismuth

Calcium

Carbon (diamond)

Chromium

Copper

Magnesium

Lead

Oxygen gas (1 atm)

Mercury

Oxygen liquid (90 K)

Hydrogen gas (1 atm)

Tungsten

Nitrogen gas (1 atm)

Air (1 atm)

Water

TABLE 12.2 Magnetic Susceptibilities *Note: Unless otherwise specified, values given are for room
temperature.

Diamagnetic Materials
A magnetic field always induces a magnetic dipole in an atom. This induced dipole points opposite to the applied
field, so its magnetic field is also directed opposite to the applied field. In paramagnetic and ferromagnetic
materials, the induced magnetic dipole is masked by much stronger permanent magnetic dipoles of the atoms.
However, in diamagnetic materials, whose atoms have no permanent magnetic dipole moments, the effect of the
induced dipole is observable.
We can now describe the magnetic effects of diamagnetic materials with the same model developed for
paramagnetic materials. In this case, however, the fictitious surface current flows opposite to the solenoid current,
and the magnetic susceptibility is negative. Values of for some diamagnetic materials are also given in Table
12.2.

INTERACTIVE
Water is a common diamagnetic material. Animals are mostly composed of water. Experiments have been
performed on frogs (https://openstax.org/l/21frogs) and mice (https://openstax.org/l/21mice) in diverging magnetic
fields. The water molecules are repelled from the applied magnetic field against gravity until the animal reaches an
equilibrium. The result is that the animal is levitated by the magnetic field.

Ferromagnetic Materials
Common magnets are made of a ferromagnetic material such as iron or one of its alloys. Experiments reveal that a
ferromagnetic material consists of tiny regions known as magnetic domains. Their volumes typically range from
to
and they contain about
to
atoms. Within a domain, the magnetic dipoles are rigidly
aligned in the same direction by coupling among the atoms. This coupling, which is due to quantum mechanical
effects, is so strong that even thermal agitation at room temperature cannot break it. The result is that each domain
has a net dipole moment. Some materials have weaker coupling and are ferromagnetic only at lower temperatures.
If the domains in a ferromagnetic sample are randomly oriented, as shown in Figure 12.24, the sample has no net
magnetic dipole moment and is said to be unmagnetized. Suppose that we fill the volume of a solenoid with an
unmagnetized ferromagnetic sample. When the magnetic field
of the solenoid is turned on, the dipole moments
of the domains rotate so that they align somewhat with the field, as depicted in Figure 12.24. In addition, the
aligned domains tend to increase in size at the expense of unaligned ones. The net effect of these two processes is

Access for free at openstax.org

12.7 • Magnetism in Matter

the creation of a net magnetic dipole moment for the ferromagnet that is directed along the applied magnetic field.
This net magnetic dipole moment is much larger than that of a paramagnetic sample, and the domains, with their
large numbers of atoms, do not become misaligned by thermal agitation. Consequently, the field due to the
alignment of the domains is quite large.

FIGURE 12.24 (a) Domains are randomly oriented in an unmagnetized ferromagnetic sample such as iron. The arrows represent the
orientations of the magnetic dipoles within the domains. (b) In an applied magnetic field, the domains align somewhat with the field. (c)
The domains of a single crystal of nickel. The white lines show the boundaries of the domains. These lines are produced by iron oxide
powder sprinkled on the crystal.

Besides iron, only four elements contain the magnetic domains needed to exhibit ferromagnetic behavior: cobalt,
nickel, gadolinium, and dysprosium. Many alloys of these elements are also ferromagnetic. Ferromagnetic materials
can be described using Equation 12.34 through Equation 12.39, the paramagnetic equations. However, the value of
for ferromagnetic material is usually on the order of
to
and it also depends on the history of the magnetic
field to which the material has been subject. A typical plot of B (the total field in the material) versus
(the applied
field) for an initially unmagnetized piece of iron is shown in Figure 12.25. Some sample numbers are (1) for
and
; (2) for
and

FIGURE 12.25 The magnetic field B in annealed iron as a function of the applied field

When
is varied over a range of positive and negative values, B is found to behave as shown in Figure 12.26. Note
that the same
(corresponding to the same current in the solenoid) can produce different values of B in the
material. The magnetic field B produced in a ferromagnetic material by an applied field
depends on the magnetic
history of the material. This effect is called hysteresis, and the curve of Figure 12.26 is called a hysteresis loop.
Notice that B does not disappear when
(i.e., when the current in the solenoid is turned off). The iron stays
magnetized, which means that it has become a permanent magnet.

529

530

12 • Sources of Magnetic Fields

FIGURE 12.26 A typical hysteresis loop for a ferromagnet. When the material is first magnetized, it follows a curve from 0 to a. When
reversed, it takes the path shown from a to b. If
is reversed again, the material follows the curve from b to a.

is

Like the paramagnetic sample of Figure 12.23, the partial alignment of the domains in a ferromagnet is equivalent to
a current flowing around the surface. A bar magnet can therefore be pictured as a tightly wound solenoid with a
large current circulating through its coils (the surface current). You can see in Figure 12.27 that this model fits quite
well. The fields of the bar magnet and the finite solenoid are strikingly similar. The figure also shows how the poles
of the bar magnet are identified. To form closed loops, the field lines outside the magnet leave the north (N) pole
and enter the south (S) pole, whereas inside the magnet, they leave S and enter N.

FIGURE 12.27 Comparison of the magnetic fields of a finite solenoid and a bar magnet.

Ferromagnetic materials are found in computer hard disk drives and permanent data storage devices (Figure 12.28).
A material used in your hard disk drives is called a spin valve, which has alternating layers of ferromagnetic (aligning
with the external magnetic field) and antiferromagnetic (each atom is aligned opposite to the next) metals. It was
observed that a significant change in resistance was discovered based on whether an applied magnetic field was on
the spin valve or not. This large change in resistance creates a quick and consistent way for recording or reading
information by an applied current.

Access for free at openstax.org

12.7 • Magnetism in Matter

FIGURE 12.28 The inside of a hard disk drive. The silver disk contains the information, whereas the thin stylus on top of the disk reads and
writes information to the disk.

EXAMPLE 12.10
Iron Core in a Coil
A long coil is tightly wound around an iron cylinder whose magnetization curve is shown in Figure 12.25. (a) If
turns per centimeter, what is the applied field
when
(b) What is the net magnetic field for
this same current? (c) What is the magnetic susceptibility in this case?
Strategy
(a) The magnetic field of a solenoid is calculated using Equation 12.28. (b) The graph is read to determine the net
magnetic field for this same current. (c) The magnetic susceptibility is calculated using Equation 12.37.
Solution
a. The applied field

of the coil is

b. From inspection of the magnetization curve of Figure 12.25, we see that, for this value of
Notice that the internal field of the aligned atoms is much larger than the externally applied field.
c. The magnetic susceptibility is calculated to be

Significance
Ferromagnetic materials have susceptibilities in the range of
which compares well to our results here.
Paramagnetic materials have fractional susceptibilities, so their applied field of the coil is much greater than the
magnetic field generated by the material.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.8
Repeat the calculations from the previous example for

531

532

12 • Chapter Review

Chapter Review
Key Terms
Ampère’s law physical law that states that the line
integral of the magnetic field around an electric
current is proportional to the current
Biot-Savart law an equation giving the magnetic field
at a point produced by a current-carrying wire
diamagnetic materials their magnetic dipoles align
oppositely to an applied magnetic field; when the
field is removed, the material is unmagnetized
ferromagnetic materials contain groups of dipoles,
called domains, that align with the applied magnetic
field; when this field is removed, the material is still
magnetized
hysteresis property of ferromagnets that is seen
when a material’s magnetic field is examined versus
the applied magnetic field; a loop is created
resulting from sweeping the applied field forward
and reverse
magnetic domains groups of magnetic dipoles that
are all aligned in the same direction and are coupled

together quantum mechanically
magnetic susceptibility ratio of the magnetic field in
the material over the applied field at that time;
positive susceptibilities are either paramagnetic or
ferromagnetic (aligned with the field) and negative
susceptibilities are diamagnetic (aligned oppositely
with the field)
paramagnetic materials their magnetic dipoles align
partially in the same direction as the applied
magnetic field; when this field is removed, the
material is unmagnetized
permeability of free space
measure of the ability
of a material, in this case free space, to support a
magnetic field
solenoid thin wire wound into a coil that produces a
magnetic field when an electric current is passed
through it
toroid donut-shaped coil closely wound around that
is one continuous wire

Key Equations
Permeability of free space
Contribution to magnetic field
from a current element
Biot–Savart law

Magnetic field due to a
long straight wire
Force between two parallel currents
Magnetic field of a current loop
Ampère’s law
Magnetic field strength
inside a solenoid
Magnetic field strength inside a toroid
Magnetic permeability
Magnetic field of a solenoid
filled with paramagnetic material

Summary
field a distance r away.

12.1 The Biot-Savart Law
• The magnetic field created by a current-carrying
wire is found by the Biot-Savart law.
• The current element

Access for free at openstax.org

produces a magnetic

12.2 Magnetic Field Due to a Thin Straight Wire
• The strength of the magnetic field created by
current in a long straight wire is given by

