13 • Chapter Review

applications such as metal detectors, braking in
trains or roller coasters, and induction cooktops.
13.6 Electric Generators and Back Emf
• An electric generator rotates a coil in a magnetic
field, inducing an emf given as a function of time
by
where A is the area of an
N-turn coil rotated at a constant angular velocity
in a uniform magnetic field
• The peak emf of a generator is
.
• Any rotating coil produces an induced emf. In

579

motors, this is called back emf because it
opposes the emf input to the motor.
13.7 Applications of Electromagnetic Induction
• Hard drives utilize magnetic induction to read/
write information.
• Other applications of magnetic induction can be
found in graphics tablets, electric and hybrid
vehicles, and in transcranial magnetic
stimulation.

Conceptual Questions
13.1 Faraday’s Law
1. A stationary coil is in a magnetic field that is
changing with time. Does the emf induced in the
coil depend on the actual values of the magnetic
field?
2. In Faraday’s experiments, what would be the
advantage of using coils with many turns?
3. A copper ring and a wooden ring of the same
dimensions are placed in magnetic fields so that
there is the same change in magnetic flux
through them. Compare the induced electric
fields and currents in the rings.
4. Discuss the factors determining the induced emf
in a closed loop of wire.
5. (a) Does the induced emf in a circuit depend on
the resistance of the circuit? (b) Does the
induced current depend on the resistance of the
circuit?

changing magnetic field so that there is no
induced emf in the loop?
10. The normal to the plane of a single-turn
conducting loop is directed at an angle to a
spatially uniform magnetic field
It has a fixed
area and orientation relative to the magnetic
field. Show that the emf induced in the loop is
given by
where A is the
area of the loop.
13.2 Lenz's Law
11. The circular conducting loops shown in the
accompanying figure are parallel, perpendicular
to the plane of the page, and coaxial. (a) When
the switch S is closed, what is the direction of
the current induced in D? (b) When the switch is
opened, what is the direction of the current
induced in loop D?

6. How would changing the radius of loop D shown
below affect its emf, assuming C and D are much
closer together compared to their radii?

12. The north pole of a magnet is moved toward a
copper loop, as shown below. If you are looking
at the loop from above the magnet, will you say
the induced current is circulating clockwise or
counterclockwise?
7. Can there be an induced emf in a circuit at an
instant when the magnetic flux through the
circuit is zero?
8. Does the induced emf always act to decrease
the magnetic flux through a circuit?
9. How would you position a flat loop of wire in a

580

13 • Chapter Review

13.3 Motional Emf
16. A bar magnet falls under the influence of gravity
along the axis of a long copper tube. If air
resistance is negligible, will there be a force to
oppose the descent of the magnet? If so, will the
magnet reach a terminal velocity?
17. Around the geographic North Pole (or magnetic
South Pole), Earth’s magnetic field is almost
vertical. If an airplane is flying northward in this
region, which side of the wing is positively
charged and which is negatively charged?
18. A wire loop moves translationally (no rotation) in
a uniform magnetic field. Is there an emf
induced in the loop?
13. The accompanying figure shows a conducting ring at 13.4 Induced Electric Fields
various positions as it moves through a magnetic
19. Is the work required to accelerate a rod from
field. What is the sense of the induced emf for each
rest to a speed v in a magnetic field greater than
of those positions?
the final kinetic energy of the rod? Why?
20. The copper sheet shown below is partially in a
magnetic field. When it is pulled to the right, a
resisting force pulls it to the left. Explain. What
happen if the sheet is pushed to the left?
14. Show that

and

have the same units.

15. State the direction of the induced current for each
case shown below, observing from the side of the
magnet.

13.5 Eddy Currents
21. A conducting sheet lies in a plane perpendicular
to a magnetic field

that is below the sheet. If

oscillates at a high frequency and the
conductor is made of a material of low resistivity,
the region above the sheet is effectively shielded
from . Explain why. Will the conductor shield
this region from static magnetic fields?
22. Electromagnetic braking can be achieved by
applying a strong magnetic field to a spinning
metal disk attached to a shaft. (a) How can a
magnetic field slow the spinning of a disk? (b)
Would the brakes work if the disk was made of
plastic instead of metal?
23. A coil is moved through a magnetic field as shown
below. The field is uniform inside the rectangle and
zero outside. What is the direction of the induced

Access for free at openstax.org

13 • Chapter Review

581

current and what is the direction of the magnetic
force on the coil at each position shown?

Problems
13.1 Faraday’s Law
24. A 50-turn coil has a diameter of 15 cm. The coil
is placed in a spatially uniform magnetic field of
magnitude 0.50 T so that the face of the coil and
the magnetic field are perpendicular. Find the
magnitude of the emf induced in the coil if the
magnetic field is reduced to zero uniformly in (a)
0.10 s, (b) 1.0 s, and (c) 60 s.
25. Repeat your calculations of the preceding
problem’s time of 0.1 s with the plane of the coil
making an angle of (a)
(b)
and (c)
with the magnetic field.
26. A square loop whose sides are 6.0-cm long is
made with copper wire of radius 1.0 mm. If a
magnetic field perpendicular to the loop is
changing at a rate of 5.0 mT/s, what is the
current in the loop?
27. The magnetic field through a circular loop of
radius 10.0 cm varies with time as shown below.
The field is perpendicular to the loop. Plot the
magnitude of the induced emf in the loop as a
function of time.

29. How would the answers to the preceding
problem change if the coil consisted of 20
closely spaced turns?
30. A long solenoid with
turns per
centimeter has a cross-sectional area of
and carries a current of 0.25 A. A coil with five
turns encircles the solenoid. When the current
through the solenoid is turned off, it decreases
to zero in 0.050 s. What is the average emf
induced in the coil?
31. A rectangular wire loop with length a and width
b lies in the xy-plane, as shown below. Within
the loop there is a time-dependent magnetic
field given by
, with
in tesla. Determine the emf induced in the loop
as a function of time.

28. The accompanying figure shows a single-turn
rectangular coil that has a resistance of
The magnetic field at all points inside the coil
varies according to
where
and
What is the
current induced in the coil at (a)
, (b)
0.002 s, (c) 2.0 s?

582

13 • Chapter Review

32. The magnetic field perpendicular to a single wire
loop of diameter 10.0 cm decreases from 0.50 T
to zero. The wire is made of copper and has a
diameter of 2.0 mm. How much charge moves
through the wire while the field is changing?
13.2 Lenz's Law
33. A single-turn circular loop of wire of radius 50
mm lies in a plane perpendicular to a spatially
uniform magnetic field. During a 0.10-s time
interval, the magnitude of the field increases
uniformly from 200 to 300 mT. (a) Determine the
emf induced in the loop. (b) If the magnetic field
is directed out of the page, what is the direction
of the current induced in the loop?
34. When a magnetic field is first turned on, the flux
through a 20-turn loop varies with time
according to
where
is in
milliwebers, t is in seconds, and the loop is in
the plane of the page with the unit normal
pointing outward. (a) What is the emf induced in
the loop as a function of time? What is the
direction of the induced current at (b) t = 0, (c)
0.10, (d) 1.0, and (e) 2.0 s?
35. The magnetic flux through the loop shown in the
accompanying figure varies with time according
to
where
is in
webers. What are the direction and magnitude of
the current through the
resistor at (a)
; (b)
and (c)

13.3 Motional Emf
37. An automobile with a radio antenna 1.0 m long
travels at 100.0 km/h in a location where the
Earth’s horizontal magnetic field is
What is the maximum possible
emf induced in the antenna due to this motion?
38. The rectangular loop of N turns shown below
moves to the right with a constant velocity
while leaving the poles of a large electromagnet.
(a) Assuming that the magnetic field is uniform
between the pole faces and negligible
elsewhere, determine the induced emf in the
loop. (b) What is the source of work that
produces this emf?

36. Use Lenz’s law to determine the direction of
induced current in each case.

39. Suppose the magnetic field of the preceding
problem oscillates with time according to
What then is the emf induced in
the loop when its trailing side is a distance d
from the right edge of the magnetic field region?
40. A coil of 1000 turns encloses an area of
.
It is rotated in 0.010 s from a position where its
plane is perpendicular to Earth’s magnetic field

Access for free at openstax.org

13 • Chapter Review

to one where its plane is parallel to the field. If
the strength of the field is
what
is the average emf induced in the coil?
41. In the circuit shown in the accompanying figure,
the rod slides along the conducting rails at a
constant velocity The velocity is in the same
plane as the rails and directed at an angle to

583

end piece, and rod all have a resistance per unit
length of
The rod moves to the left at
If
everywhere in the
region, what is the current in the circuit (a) when
(b) when
Specify also
the sense of the current flow.

them. A uniform magnetic field is directed out
of the page. What is the emf induced in the rod?

42. The rod shown in the accompanying figure is
moving through a uniform magnetic field of
strength
with a constant velocity of
magnitude
What is the potential
difference between the ends of the rod? Which
end of the rod is at a higher potential?

45. The rod shown below moves to the right on
essentially zero-resistance rails at a speed of
If
everywhere in the
region, what is the current through the
resistor? Does the current circulate clockwise or
counterclockwise?

46. Shown below is a conducting rod that slides
along metal rails. The apparatus is in a uniform
magnetic field of strength 0.25 T, which is
directly into the page. The rod is pulled to the
43. A 25-cm rod moves at 5.0 m/s in a plane
perpendicular to a magnetic field of strength
0.25 T. The rod, velocity vector, and magnetic
field vector are mutually perpendicular, as
indicated in the accompanying figure. Calculate
(a) the magnetic force on an electron in the rod,
(b) the electric field in the rod, and (c) the
potential difference between the ends of the
rod. (d) What is the speed of the rod if the
potential difference is 1.0 V?

right at a constant speed of 5.0 m/s by a force
The only significant resistance in the circuit
comes from the
resistor shown. (a) What
is the emf induced in the circuit? (b) What is the
induced current? Does it circulate clockwise or
counter clockwise? (c) What is the magnitude of
? (d) What are the power output of
power dissipated in the resistor?

and the

13.4 Induced Electric Fields

44. In the accompanying figure, the rails, connecting

47. Calculate the induced electric field in a 50-turn
coil with a diameter of 15 cm that is placed in a
spatially uniform magnetic field of magnitude

584

13 • Chapter Review

0.50 T so that the face of the coil and the
magnetic field are perpendicular. This magnetic
field is reduced to zero in 0.10 seconds. Assume
that the magnetic field is cylindrically symmetric
with respect to the central axis of the coil.
48. The magnetic field through a circular loop of
radius 10.0 cm varies with time as shown in the
accompanying figure. The field is perpendicular
to the loop. Assuming cylindrical symmetry with
respect to the central axis of the loop, plot the
induced electric field in the loop as a function of
time.

49. The current I through a long solenoid with n
turns per meter and radius R is changing with
time as given by dI/dt. Calculate the induced
electric field as a function of distance r from the
central axis of the solenoid.

52. The magnetic field at all points within the
cylindrical region whose cross-section is
indicated in the accompanying figure starts at
1.0 T and decreases uniformly to zero in 20 s.
What is the electric field (both magnitude and
direction) as a function of r, the distance from
the geometric center of the region?

50. Calculate the electric field induced both inside
and outside the solenoid of the preceding
problem if
51. Over a region of radius R, there is a spatially
uniform magnetic field
(See below.) At
,
after which it decreases at a
constant rate to zero in 30 s. (a) What is the
electric field in the regions where
and
during that 30-s interval? (b) Assume that
. How much work is done by the
electric field on a proton that is carried once
clock wise around a circular path of radius 5.0
cm? (c) How much work is done by the electric
field on a proton that is carried once
counterclockwise around a circular path of any
radius
? (d) At the instant when
, a proton enters the magnetic field
at A, moving a velocity
as shown. What are the electric and magnetic
forces on the proton at that instant?

53. The current in a long solenoid with 20 turns per
centimeter of radius 3 cm is varied with time at a
rate of 2 A/s. A circular loop of wire of radius 5
cm and resistance
surrounds the solenoid.
Find the electrical current induced in the loop.
54. The current in a long solenoid of radius 3 cm and
20 turns/cm is varied with time at a rate of 2 A/s.
Find the electric field at a distance of 4 cm from
the center of the solenoid.
13.6 Electric Generators and Back Emf
55. Design a current loop that, when rotated in a

Access for free at openstax.org

13 • Chapter Review

uniform magnetic field of strength 0.10 T, will
produce an emf
where
and
56. A flat, square coil of 20 turns that has sides of
length 15.0 cm is rotating in a magnetic field of
strength 0.050 T. If the maximum emf produced
in the coil is 30.0 mV, what is the angular
velocity of the coil?
57. A 50-turn rectangular coil with dimensions
rotates in a uniform magnetic
field of magnitude 0.75 T at 3600 rev/min. (a)
Determine the emf induced in the coil as a
function of time. (b) If the coil is connected to a
resistor, what is the power as a function
of time required to keep the coil turning at 3600
rpm? (c) Answer part (b) if the coil is connected
to a 2000- resistor.
58. The square armature coil of an alternating
current generator has 200 turns and is 20.0 cm
on side. When it rotates at 3600 rpm, its peak
output voltage is 120 V. (a) What is the
frequency of the output voltage? (b) What is the
strength of the magnetic field in which the coil is
turning?
59. A flip coil is a relatively simple device used to
measure a magnetic field. It consists of a
circular coil of N turns wound with fine
conducting wire. The coil is attached to a
ballistic galvanometer, a device that measures
the total charge that passes through it. The coil
is placed in a magnetic field such that its face
is perpendicular to the field. It is then flipped
through
and the total charge Q that flows

585

through the galvanometer is measured. (a) If the
total resistance of the coil and galvanometer is
R, what is the relationship between B and Q?
Because the coil is very small, you can assume
that is uniform over it. (b) How can you
determine whether or not the magnetic field is
perpendicular to the face of the coil?
60. The flip coil of the preceding problem has a
radius of 3.0 cm and is wound with 40 turns of
copper wire. The total resistance of the coil and
ballistic galvanometer is
When the coil is
flipped through
in a magnetic field
a
change of 0.090 C flows through the ballistic
galvanometer. (a) Assuming that and the face
of the coil are initially perpendicular, what is the
magnetic field? (b) If the coil is flipped through
what is the reading of the galvanometer?
61. A 120-V, series-wound motor has a field
resistance of 80 and an armature resistance
of 10 . When it is operating at full speed, a
back emf of 75 V is generated. (a) What is the
initial current drawn by the motor? When the
motor is operating at full speed, where are (b)
the current drawn by the motor, (c) the power
output of the source, (d) the power output of the
motor, and (e) the power dissipated in the two
resistances?
62. A small series-wound dc motor is operated from
a 12-V car battery. Under a normal load, the
motor draws 4.0 A, and when the armature is
clamped so that it cannot turn, the motor draws
24 A. What is the back emf when the motor is
operating normally?

Additional Problems
63. Shown in the following figure is a long, straight
wire and a single-turn rectangular loop, both of
which lie in the plane of the page. The wire is
parallel to the long sides of the loop and is 0.50
m away from the closer side. At an instant when
the emf induced in the loop is 2.0 V, what is the
time rate of change of the current in the wire?

64. A metal bar of mass 500 g slides outward at a
constant speed of 1.5 cm/s over two parallel

rails separated by a distance of 30 cm which are
part of a U-shaped conductor. There is a uniform
magnetic field of magnitude 2 T pointing out of
the page over the entire area. The railings and
metal bar have an equivalent resistance of
(a) Determine the induced current, both
magnitude and direction. (b) Find the direction
of the induced current if the magnetic field is
pointing into the page. (c) Find the direction of
the induced current if the magnetic field is
pointed into the page and the bar moves
inwards.
65. A current is induced in a circular loop of radius
1.5 cm between two poles of a horseshoe
electromagnet when the current in the

586

13 • Chapter Review

electromagnet is varied. The magnetic field in
the area of the loop is perpendicular to the area
and has a uniform magnitude. If the rate of
change of magnetic field is 10 T/s, find the
magnitude and direction of the induced current
if resistance of the loop is
.

frequency of 5 cycles per second in a region of
uniform magnetic field of 2 Gauss perpendicular
to the axis of rotation. (a) Find an expression for
the time-dependent flux through the ring. (b)
Determine the time-dependent current through
the ring if it has a resistance of 10

66. A metal bar of length 25 cm is placed
perpendicular to a uniform magnetic field of
strength 3 T. (a) Determine the induced emf
between the ends of the rod when it is not
moving. (b) Determine the emf when the rod is
moving perpendicular to its length and magnetic
field with a speed of 50 cm/s.
67. A coil with 50 turns and area 10
is oriented
with its plane perpendicular to a 0.75-T
magnetic field. If the coil is flipped over (rotated
through
) in 0.20 s, what is the average emf
induced in it?
68. A 2-turn planer loop of flexible wire is placed
inside a long solenoid of n turns per meter that
carries a constant current . The area A of the
loop is changed by pulling on its sides while
ensuring that the plane of the loop always
remains perpendicular to the axis of the
solenoid. If
per meter,
and
what is the emf induced in the
loop when
69. The conducting rod shown in the accompanying
figure moves along parallel metal rails that are
25-cm apart. The system is in a uniform
magnetic field of strength 0.75 T, which is
directed into the page. The resistances of the
rod and the rails are negligible, but the section
PQ has a resistance of
. (a) What is the
emf (including its sense) induced in the rod
when it is moving to the right with a speed of 5.0
m/s? (b) What force is required to keep the rod
moving at this speed? (c) What is the rate at
which work is done by this force? (d) What is the
power dissipated in the resistor?

70. A circular loop of wire of radius 10 cm is
mounted on a vertical shaft and rotated at a

Access for free at openstax.org

71. The magnetic field between the poles of a
horseshoe electromagnet is uniform and has a
cylindrical symmetry about an axis from the
middle of the South Pole to the middle of the
North Pole. The magnitude of the magnetic field
changes as a rate of dB/dt due to the changing
current through the electromagnet. Determine
the electric field at a distance r from the center.
72. A long solenoid of radius a with n turns per unit
length is carrying a time-dependent current
, where
and are
constants. The solenoid is surrounded by a wire
of resistance R that has two circular loops of
radius b with
(see the following figure).
Find the magnitude and direction of current
induced in the outer loops at time
.

73. A 120-V, series-wound dc motor draws 0.50 A
from its power source when operating at full
speed, and it draws 2.0 A when it starts. The
resistance of the armature coils is
. (a)
What is the resistance of the field coils? (b) What
is the back emf of the motor when it is running at

13 • Chapter Review

full speed? (c) The motor operates at a different
speed and draws 1.0 A from the source. What is
the back emf in this case?
74. The armature and field coils of a series-wound
motor have a total resistance of
. When

587

connected to a 120-V source and running at
normal speed, the motor draws 4.0 A. (a) How
large is the back emf? (b) What current will the
motor draw just after it is turned on? Can you
suggest a way to avoid this large initial current?

Challenge Problems
75. A copper wire of length L is fashioned into a
circular coil with N turns. When the magnetic
field through the coil changes with time, for what
value of N is the induced emf a maximum?
76. A 0.50-kg copper sheet drops through a uniform
horizontal magnetic field of 1.5 T, and it reaches
a terminal velocity of 2.0 m/s. (a) What is the net
magnetic force on the sheet after it reaches
terminal velocity? (b) Describe the mechanism
responsible for this force. (c) How much power is
dissipated as Joule heating while the sheet
moves at terminal velocity?
77. A circular copper disk of radius 7.5 cm rotates at
2400 rpm around the axis through its center and
perpendicular to its face. The disk is in a uniform
magnetic field of strength 1.2 T that is
directed along the axis. What is the potential
difference between the rim and the axis of the
disk?
78. A short rod of length a moves with its velocity
parallel to an infinite wire carrying a current I
(see below). If the end of the rod nearer the wire
is a distance b from the wire, what is the emf
induced in the rod?

79. A rectangular circuit containing a resistance R is
pulled at a constant velocity away from a long,
straight wire carrying a current
(see below).
Derive an equation that gives the current
induced in the circuit as a function of the
distance x between the near side of the circuit
and the wire.

80. Two infinite solenoids cross the plane of the
circuit as shown below. The radii of the
solenoids are 0.10 and 0.20 m, respectively, and
the current in each solenoid is changing such
that
What are the currents in
the resistors of the circuit?

588

13 • Chapter Review

and is pushed into the field by a constant force
Calculate the speed of the loop as a function of time.

83. A square bar of mass m and resistance R is
sliding without friction down very long, parallel
conducting rails of negligible resistance (see
below). The two rails are a distance l apart and
are connected to each other at the bottom of the
incline by a zero-resistance wire. The rails are
inclined at an angle , and there is a uniform
vertical magnetic field throughout the region.
(a) Show that the bar acquires a terminal
velocity given by

(b) Calculate

the work per unit time done by the force of
gravity. (c) Compare this with the power
dissipated in the Joule heating of the bar. (d)
What would happen if

were reversed?

81. An eight-turn coil is tightly wrapped around the
outside of the long solenoid as shown below. The
radius of the solenoid is 2.0 cm and it has 10 turns
per centimeter. The current through the solenoid
increases according to
where
and
What is the
emf induced in the coil when (a)
, (b)
and (c)

∞

84. The accompanying figure shows a metal disk of
inner radius
and other radius
rotating at an
angular velocity while in a uniform magnetic field
directed parallel to the rotational axis. The brush
leads of a voltmeter are connected to the dark’s
inner and outer surfaces as shown. What is the
reading of the voltmeter?
82. Shown below is a long rectangular loop of width w,
length l, mass m, and resistance R. The loop starts
from rest at the edge of a uniform magnetic field

Access for free at openstax.org

13 • Chapter Review

589

a 12.0-kV maximum emf. (a) At what angular
velocity must the coil be spun? (b) What is
unreasonable about this result? (c) Which
assumption or premise is responsible?
88. A circular loop of wire of radius 10 cm is
mounted on a vertical shaft and rotated at a
frequency of 5 cycles per second in a region of
uniform magnetic field of
perpendicular to the axis of rotation. (a) Find an
expression for the time-dependent flux through
the ring (b) Determine the time-dependent
current through the ring if it has a resistance of
.
85. A long solenoid with 10 turns per centimeter is
placed inside a copper ring such that both
objects have the same central axis. The radius of
the ring is 10.0 cm, and the radius of the
solenoid is 5.0 cm. (a) What is the emf induced
in the ring when the current I through the
solenoid is 5.0 A and changing at a rate of 100
A/s? (b) What is the emf induced in the ring
when
and
(c) What
is the electric field inside the ring for these two
cases? (d) Suppose the ring is moved so that its
central axis and the central axis of the solenoid
are still parallel but no longer coincide. (You
should assume that the solenoid is still inside
the ring.) Now what is the emf induced in the
ring? (e) Can you calculate the electric field in
the ring as you did in part (c)?
86. The current in the long, straight wire shown in
the accompanying figure is given by
where
and
What is the current induced in
the rectangular loop at (a)
and (b)
The resistance of the loop is

87. A 500-turn coil with a
area is spun in
Earth’s
magnetic field, producing

89. A long solenoid of radius with turns per unit
length is carrying a time-dependent current
where
and are constants.
The solenoid is surrounded by a wire of
resistance R that has two circular loops of radius
b with
. Find the magnitude and direction
of current induced in the outer loops at time
.
90. A rectangular copper loop of mass 100 g and
resistance
is in a region of uniform magnetic
field of strength
that is perpendicular to the
area enclosed by the ring and horizontal to Earth’s
surface (see below). The width of the loop is
. The loop is let go from rest when it is at
the edge of the nonzero magnetic field region. (a) If
the loop were long enough for it to reach terminal
velocity before exiting the region of magnetic field,
what would be its terminal velocity? (b) Find an
expression for the speed as a function of time
while the top of the loop is still in the magnetic
field.

91. A metal bar of mass m slides without friction over
two rails a distance D apart in the region that has a
uniform magnetic field of magnitude
and
direction perpendicular to the rails (see below). The
two rails are connected at one end to a resistor
whose resistance is much larger than the resistance
of the rails and the bar. The bar is given an initial

590

13 • Chapter Review

speed of . It is found to slow down. How far does
the bar go before coming to rest? Assume that the
magnetic field of the induced current is negligible
compared to
.

92. A time-dependent uniform magnetic field of
magnitude B(t) is confined in a cylindrical region
of radius R. A conducting rod of length 2D is
placed in the region, as shown below. Show that
the emf between the ends of the rod is given by
. (Hint: To find the emf

Access for free at openstax.org

between the ends, we need to integrate the
electric field from one end to the other. To find
the electric field, use Faraday’s law as
“Ampère’s law for E.”)

CHAPTER 14

Inductance

FIGURE 14.1 A smartphone charging mat contains a coil that receives alternating current, or current that is constantly increasing and
decreasing. The varying current induces an emf in the smartphone, which charges its battery. Note that the black box containing the
electrical plug also contains a transformer (discussed in Alternating-Current Circuits) that modifies the current from the outlet to suit the
needs of the smartphone. (credit: modification of work by “LG”/Flickr)

CHAPTER OUTLINE
14.1 Mutual Inductance
14.2 Self-Inductance and Inductors
14.3 Energy in a Magnetic Field
14.4 RL Circuits
14.5 Oscillations in an LC Circuit
14.6 RLC Series Circuits
INTRODUCTION In Electromagnetic Induction, we discussed how a time-varying magnetic flux induces an emf in a
circuit. In many of our calculations, this flux was due to an applied time-dependent magnetic field. The reverse of
this phenomenon also occurs: The current flowing in a circuit produces its own magnetic field.
In Electromagnetic Induction, we also saw that induction is the process by which an emf is induced by changing
electric flux and separation of a dipole. So far, we have discussed some examples of induction, although some of

592

14 • Inductance

these applications are more effective than others. The smartphone charging mat in the chapter opener photo also
works by induction. Is there a useful physical quantity related to how “effective” a given device is? The answer is
yes, and that physical quantity is inductance. In this chapter, we look at the applications of inductance in electronic
devices and how inductors are used in circuits.

14.1 Mutual Inductance
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Correlate two nearby circuits that carry time-varying currents with the emf induced in each circuit
• Describe examples in which mutual inductance may or may not be desirable
Inductance is the property of a device that tells us how effectively it induces an emf in another device. In other
words, it is a physical quantity that expresses the effectiveness of a given device.
When two circuits carrying time-varying currents are close to one another, the magnetic flux through each circuit
varies because of the changing current I in the other circuit. Consequently, an emf is induced in each circuit by the
changing current in the other. This type of emf is therefore called a mutually induced emf, and the phenomenon that
occurs is known as mutual inductance (M). As an example, let’s consider two tightly wound coils (Figure 14.2).
Coils 1 and 2 have
and
turns and carry currents
and
respectively. The flux through a single turn of coil
2 produced by the magnetic field of the current in coil 1 is
whereas the flux through a single turn of coil 1 due
to the magnetic field of
is

FIGURE 14.2 Some of the magnetic field lines produced by the current in coil 1 pass through coil 2.

The mutual inductance
of coil 2 with respect to coil 1 is the ratio of the flux through the
produced by the magnetic field of the current in coil 1, divided by that current, that is,

turns of coil 2
14.1

Similarly, the mutual inductance of coil 1 with respect to coil 2 is
14.2
Like capacitance, mutual inductance is a geometric quantity. It depends on the shapes and relative positions of the
two coils, and it is independent of the currents in the coils. The SI unit for mutual inductance M is called the henry
(H) in honor of Joseph Henry (1799–1878), an American scientist who discovered induced emf independently of
Faraday. Thus, we have
. From Equation 14.1 and Equation 14.2, we can show that
so
we usually drop the subscripts associated with mutual inductance and write

Access for free at openstax.org

14.1 • Mutual Inductance

14.3

The emf developed in either coil is found by combining Faraday’s law and the definition of mutual inductance. Since
is the total flux through coil 2 due to , we obtain
14.4
where we have used the fact that M is a time-independent constant because the geometry is time-independent.
Similarly, we have
14.5

In Equation 14.5, we can see the significance of the earlier description of mutual inductance (M) as a geometric
quantity. The value of M neatly encapsulates the physical properties of circuit elements and allows us to separate
the physical layout of the circuit from the dynamic quantities, such as the emf and the current. Equation 14.5
defines the mutual inductance in terms of properties in the circuit, whereas the previous definition of mutual
inductance in Equation 14.1 is defined in terms of the magnetic flux experienced, regardless of circuit elements. You
should be careful when using Equation 14.4 and Equation 14.5 because
do not necessarily represent the
total emfs in the respective coils. Each coil can also have an emf induced in it because of its self-inductance (selfinductance will be discussed in more detail in a later section).
A large mutual inductance M may or may not be desirable. We want a transformer to have a large mutual inductance.
But an appliance, such as an electric clothes dryer, can induce a dangerous emf on its metal case if the mutual
inductance between its coils and the case is large. One way to reduce mutual inductance is to counter-wind coils to
cancel the magnetic field produced (Figure 14.3).

FIGURE 14.3 The heating coils of an electric clothes dryer can be counter-wound so that their magnetic fields cancel one another, greatly
reducing the mutual inductance with the case of the dryer.

Digital signal processing is another example in which mutual inductance is reduced by counter-winding coils. The
rapid on/off emf representing 1s and 0s in a digital circuit creates a complex time-dependent magnetic field. An emf
can be generated in neighboring conductors. If that conductor is also carrying a digital signal, the induced emf may
be large enough to switch 1s and 0s, with consequences ranging from inconvenient to disastrous.

593

594

14 • Inductance

EXAMPLE 14.1
Mutual Inductance
Figure 14.4 shows a coil of
turns and radius
surrounding a long solenoid of length
radius
and
turns. (a) What is the mutual inductance of the two coils? (b) If
,
,
, and the current in the solenoid is changing at a rate of 200 A/s, what is the emf induced in the
surrounding coil?

,

FIGURE 14.4 A solenoid surrounded by a coil.

Strategy
There is no magnetic field outside the solenoid, and the field inside has magnitude
and is
directed parallel to the solenoid’s axis. We can use this magnetic field to find the magnetic flux through the
surrounding coil and then use this flux to calculate the mutual inductance for part (a), using Equation 14.3. We solve
part (b) by calculating the mutual inductance from the given quantities and using Equation 14.4 to calculate the
induced emf.
Solution
a. The magnetic flux

through the surrounding coil is

Now from Equation 14.3, the mutual inductance is

b. Using the previous expression and the given values, the mutual inductance is

Thus, from Equation 14.4, the emf induced in the surrounding coil is

Significance
Notice that M in part (a) is independent of the radius
of the surrounding coil because the solenoid’s magnetic
field is confined to its interior. In principle, we can also calculate M by finding the magnetic flux through the solenoid
produced by the current in the surrounding coil. This approach is much more difficult because
is so
complicated. However, since
we do know the result of this calculation.

Access for free at openstax.org

14.2 • Self-Inductance and Inductors

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 14.1
A current
flows through the solenoid of part (b) of Example 14.1. What is the
maximum emf induced in the surrounding coil?

14.2 Self-Inductance and Inductors
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Correlate the rate of change of current to the induced emf created by that current in the same circuit
• Derive the self-inductance for a cylindrical solenoid
• Derive the self-inductance for a rectangular toroid
Mutual inductance arises when a current in one circuit produces a changing magnetic field that induces an emf in
another circuit. But can the magnetic field affect the current in the original circuit that produced the field? The
answer is yes, and this is the phenomenon called self-inductance.

Inductors
Figure 14.5 shows some of the magnetic field lines due to the current in a circular loop of wire. If the current is
constant, the magnetic flux through the loop is also constant. However, if the current I were to vary with time—say,
immediately after switch S is closed—then the magnetic flux
would correspondingly change. Then Faraday’s law
tells us that an emf would be induced in the circuit, where
14.6
Since the magnetic field due to a current-carrying wire is directly proportional to the current, the flux due to this
field is also proportional to the current; that is,
14.7

FIGURE 14.5 A magnetic field is produced by the current I in the loop. If I were to vary with time, the magnetic flux through the loop would
also vary and an emf would be induced in the loop.

This can also be written as

14.8

where the constant of proportionality L is known as the self-inductance of the wire loop. If the loop has N turns, this
equation becomes
14.9
By convention, the positive sense of the normal to the loop is related to the current by the right-hand rule, so in
Figure 14.5, the normal points downward. With this convention,
is positive in Equation 14.9, so L always has a
positive value.
For a loop with N turns,

so the induced emf may be written in terms of the self-inductance as

595

596

14 • Inductance

14.10

When using this equation to determine L, it is easiest to ignore the signs of

and calculate L as

Since self-inductance is associated with the magnetic field produced by a current, any configuration of conductors
possesses self-inductance. For example, besides the wire loop, a long, straight wire has self-inductance, as does a
coaxial cable. A coaxial cable is most commonly used by the cable television industry and may also be found
connecting to your cable modem. Coaxial cables are used due to their ability to transmit electrical signals with
minimal distortions. Coaxial cables have two long cylindrical conductors that possess current and a self-inductance
that may have undesirable effects.
A circuit element used to provide self-inductance is known as an inductor. It is represented by the symbol shown in
Figure 14.6, which resembles a coil of wire, the basic form of the inductor. Figure 14.7 shows several types of
inductors commonly used in circuits.
FIGURE 14.6 Symbol used to represent an inductor in a circuit.

FIGURE 14.7 A variety of inductors. Whether they are encapsulated like the top three shown or wound around in a coil like the bottommost one, each is simply a relatively long coil of wire. (credit: Windell Oskay)

In accordance with Lenz’s law, the negative sign in Equation 14.10 indicates that the induced emf across an inductor
always has a polarity that opposes the change in the current. For example, if the current flowing from A to B in
Figure 14.8(a) were increasing, the induced emf (represented by the imaginary battery) would have the polarity
shown in order to oppose the increase. If the current from A to B were decreasing, then the induced emf would have
the opposite polarity, again to oppose the change in current (Figure 14.8(b)). Finally, if the current through the
inductor were constant, no emf would be induced in the coil.

Access for free at openstax.org

14.2 • Self-Inductance and Inductors

FIGURE 14.8 The induced emf across an inductor always acts to oppose the change in the current. This can be visualized as an imaginary
battery causing current to flow to oppose the change in (a) and reinforce the change in (b).

One common application of inductance is to allow traffic signals to sense when vehicles are waiting at a street
intersection. An electrical circuit with an inductor is placed in the road underneath the location where a waiting car
will stop. The body of the car increases the inductance and the circuit changes, sending a signal to the traffic lights
to change colors. Similarly, metal detectors used for airport security employ the same technique. A coil or inductor
in the metal detector frame acts as both a transmitter and a receiver. The pulsed signal from the transmitter coil
induces a signal in the receiver. The self-inductance of the circuit is affected by any metal object in the path (Figure
14.9). Metal detectors can be adjusted for sensitivity and can also sense the presence of metal on a person.

FIGURE 14.9 The familiar security gate at an airport not only detects metals, but can also indicate their approximate height above the floor.
(credit: “Alexbuirds”/Wikimedia Commons)

Large induced voltages are found in camera flashes. Camera flashes use a battery, two inductors that function as a
transformer, and a switching system or oscillator to induce large voltages. Recall from Oscillations
(http://openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-1/pages/15-introduction) on oscillations that “oscillation” is
defined as the fluctuation of a quantity, or repeated regular fluctuations of a quantity, between two extreme values
around an average value. Also recall (from Electromagnetic Induction on electromagnetic induction) that we need a
changing magnetic field, brought about by a changing current, to induce a voltage in another coil. The oscillator
system does this many times as the battery voltage is boosted to over 1000 volts. (You may hear the high-pitched
whine from the transformer as the capacitor is being charged.) A capacitor stores the high voltage for later use in
powering the flash.

EXAMPLE 14.2
Self-Inductance of a Coil
An induced emf of 20 mV is measured across a coil of 50 closely wound turns while the current through it increases
uniformly from 0.0 to 5.0 A in 0.10 s. (a) What is the self-inductance of the coil? (b) With the current at 5.0 A, what is
the flux through each turn of the coil?

597

598

14 • Inductance

Strategy
Both parts of this problem give all the information needed to solve for the self-inductance in part (a) or the flux
through each turn of the coil in part (b). The equations needed are Equation 14.10 for part (a) and Equation 14.9 for
part (b).
Solution
a. Ignoring the negative sign and using magnitudes, we have, from Equation 14.10,

b. From Equation 14.9, the flux is given in terms of the current by

, so

Significance
The self-inductance and flux calculated in parts (a) and (b) are typical values for coils found in contemporary
devices. If the current is not changing over time, the flux is not changing in time, so no emf is induced.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 14.2
Current flows through the inductor in Figure 14.8 from B to A instead of from A to B as shown. Is the current
increasing or decreasing in order to produce the emf given in diagram (a)? In diagram (b)?

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 14.3
A changing current induces an emf of 10 V across a 0.25-H inductor. What is the rate at which the current is
changing?
A good approach for calculating the self-inductance of an inductor consists of the following steps:

PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Self-Inductance
1. Assume a current I is flowing through the inductor.
2. Determine the magnetic field produced by the current. If there is appropriate symmetry, you may be able to
do this with Ampère’s law.
3. Obtain the magnetic flux,
4. With the flux known, the self-inductance can be found from Equation 14.9,
.
To demonstrate this procedure, we now calculate the self-inductances of two inductors.

Cylindrical Solenoid
Consider a long, cylindrical solenoid with length l, cross-sectional area A, and N turns of wire. We assume that the
length of the solenoid is so much larger than its diameter that we can take the magnetic field to be
throughout the interior of the solenoid, that is, we ignore end effects in the solenoid. With a current I flowing
through the coils, the magnetic field produced within the solenoid is
14.11
so the magnetic flux through one turn is

Access for free at openstax.org

14.2 • Self-Inductance and Inductors

14.12
Using Equation 14.9, we find for the self-inductance of the solenoid,
14.13

If

is the number of turns per unit length of the solenoid, we may write Equation 14.13 as
14.14

where
is the volume of the solenoid. Notice that the self-inductance of a long solenoid depends only on its
physical properties (such as the number of turns of wire per unit length and the volume), and not on the magnetic
field or the current. This is true for inductors in general.

Rectangular Toroid
A toroid with a rectangular cross-section is shown in Figure 14.10. The inner and outer radii of the toroid are
is the height of the toroid. Applying Ampère’s law in the same manner as we did in Example 13.8
for a toroid with a circular cross-section, we find the magnetic field inside a rectangular toroid is also given by
14.15
where r is the distance from the central axis of the toroid. Because the field changes within the toroid, we must
calculate the flux by integrating over the toroid’s cross-section. Using the infinitesimal cross-sectional area element
shown in Figure 14.10, we obtain
14.16

FIGURE 14.10 Calculating the self-inductance of a rectangular toroid.

Now from Equation 14.16, we obtain for the self-inductance of a rectangular toroid
14.17

As expected, the self-inductance is a constant determined by only the physical properties of the toroid.

599

600

14 • Inductance

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 14.4
(a) Calculate the self-inductance of a solenoid that is tightly wound with wire of diameter 0.10 cm, has a crosssectional area of
, and is 40 cm long. (b) If the current through the solenoid decreases uniformly from 10 to
0 A in 0.10 s, what is the emf induced between the ends of the solenoid?

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 14.5
(a) What is the magnetic flux through one turn of a solenoid of self-inductance
when a current of 3.0
A flows through it? Assume that the solenoid has 1000 turns and is wound from wire of diameter 1.0 mm. (b) What
is the cross-sectional area of the solenoid?

14.3 Energy in a Magnetic Field
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain how energy can be stored in a magnetic field
• Derive the equation for energy stored in a coaxial cable given the magnetic energy density
The energy of a capacitor is stored in the electric field between its plates. Similarly, an inductor has the capability to
store energy, but in its magnetic field. This energy can be found by integrating the magnetic energy density,
14.18
over the appropriate volume. To understand where this formula comes from, let’s consider the long, cylindrical
solenoid of the previous section. Again using the infinite solenoid approximation, we can assume that the magnetic
field is essentially constant and given by
everywhere inside the solenoid. Thus, the energy stored in a
solenoid or the magnetic energy density times volume is equivalent to
14.19
With the substitution of Equation 14.14, this becomes
14.20

Although derived for a special case, this equation gives the energy stored in the magnetic field of any inductor. We
can see this by considering an arbitrary inductor through which a changing current is passing. At any instant, the
magnitude of the induced emf is
where is the induced current at that instance. Therefore, the power
absorbed by the inductor is
14.21
The total energy stored in the magnetic field when the current increases from 0 to I in a time interval from 0 to t can
be determined by integrating this expression:
14.22

Access for free at openstax.org

14.3 • Energy in a Magnetic Field

EXAMPLE 14.3
Self-Inductance of a Coaxial Cable
Figure 14.11 shows two long, concentric cylindrical shells of radii
and
As discussed in Capacitance on
capacitance, this configuration is a simplified representation of a coaxial cable. The capacitance per unit length of
the cable has already been calculated. Now (a) determine the magnetic energy stored per unit length of the coaxial
cable and (b) use this result to find the self-inductance per unit length of the cable.

FIGURE 14.11 (a) A coaxial cable is represented here by two hollow, concentric cylindrical conductors along which electric current flows in
opposite directions. (b) The magnetic field between the conductors can be found by applying Ampère’s law to the dashed path. (c) The
cylindrical shell is used to find the magnetic energy stored in a length l of the cable.

Strategy
The magnetic field both inside and outside the coaxial cable is determined by Ampère’s law. Based on this magnetic
field, we can use Equation 14.22 to calculate the energy density of the magnetic field. The magnetic energy is
calculated by an integral of the magnetic energy density times the differential volume over the cylindrical shell. After
the integration is carried out, we have a closed-form solution for part (a). The self-inductance per unit length is
determined based on this result and Equation 14.22.
Solution
a. We determine the magnetic field between the conductors by applying Ampère’s law to the dashed circular
path shown in Figure 14.11(b). Because of the cylindrical symmetry,

This gives us

is constant along the path, and

601

602

14 • Inductance

In the region outside the cable, a similar application of Ampère’s law shows that
, since no net current
crosses the area bounded by a circular path where
This argument also holds when
that is, in
the region within the inner cylinder. All the magnetic energy of the cable is therefore stored between the two
conductors. Since the energy density of the magnetic field is

the energy stored in a cylindrical shell of inner radius r, outer radius
figure) is

and length l (see part (c) of the

Thus, the total energy of the magnetic field in a length l of the cable is

and the energy per unit length is
b. From Equation 14.22,

.

where L is the self-inductance of a length l of the coaxial cable. Equating the previous two equations, we find
that the self-inductance per unit length of the cable is

Significance
The inductance per unit length depends only on the inner and outer radii as seen in the result. To increase the
inductance, we could either increase the outer radius
or decrease the inner radius
. In the limit as the two
radii become equal, the inductance goes to zero. In this limit, there is no coaxial cable. Also, the magnetic energy
per unit length from part (a) is proportional to the square of the current.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 14.6
How much energy is stored in the inductor of Example 14.2 after the current reaches its maximum value?

14.4 RL Circuits
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Analyze circuits that have an inductor and resistor in series
• Describe how current and voltage exponentially grow or decay based on the initial conditions
A circuit with resistance and self-inductance is known as an RL circuit. Figure 14.12(a) shows an RL circuit
consisting of a resistor, an inductor, a constant source of emf, and switches
and
When
is closed, the circuit
is equivalent to a single-loop circuit consisting of a resistor and an inductor connected across a source of emf
(Figure 14.12(b)). When
is opened and
is closed, the circuit becomes a single-loop circuit with only a resistor
and an inductor (Figure 14.12(c)).

Access for free at openstax.org

14.4 • RL Circuits

FIGURE 14.12 (a) An RL circuit with switches
after
is opened and
is closed.

and

(b) The equivalent circuit with

closed and

open. (c) The equivalent circuit

We first consider the RL circuit of Figure 14.12(b). Once
is closed and
is open, the source of emf produces a
current in the circuit. If there were no self-inductance in the circuit, the current would rise immediately to a steady
value of
However, from Faraday’s law, the increasing current produces an emf
across the
inductor. In accordance with Lenz’s law, the induced emf counteracts the increase in the current and is directed as
shown in the figure. As a result, I(t) starts at zero and increases asymptotically to its final value.
Applying Kirchhoff’s loop rule to this circuit, we obtain
14.23
which is a first-order differential equation for I(t). Notice its similarity to the equation for a capacitor and resistor in
series (See RC Circuits). Similarly, the solution to Equation 14.23 can be found by making substitutions in the
equations relating the capacitor to the inductor. This gives
14.24

where
14.25
is the inductive time constant of the circuit.
The current I(t) is plotted in Figure 14.13(a). It starts at zero, and as

∞ , I(t) approaches

asymptotically. The

induced emf
is directly proportional to dI/dt, or the slope of the curve. Hence, while at its greatest
immediately after the switches are thrown, the induced emf decreases to zero with time as the current approaches
its final value of
The circuit then becomes equivalent to a resistor connected across a source of emf.

FIGURE 14.13 Time variation of (a) the electric current and (b) the magnitude of the induced voltage across the coil in the circuit of Figure
14.12(b).

603

604

14 • Inductance

The energy stored in the magnetic field of an inductor is
14.26
Thus, as the current approaches the maximum current
and asymptotically approaches a maximum of

, the stored energy in the inductor increases from zero

The time constant
tells us how rapidly the current increases to its final value. At
is, from Equation 14.24,

the current in the circuit
14.27

which is
of the final value
approaches
.

. The smaller the inductive time constant

the more rapidly the current

We can find the time dependence of the induced voltage across the inductor in this circuit by using
and Equation 14.24:
14.28
The magnitude of this function is plotted in Figure 14.13(b). The greatest value of
it occurs when dI/
dt is greatest, which is immediately after
is closed and
is opened. In the approach to steady state, dI/dt
decreases to zero. As a result, the voltage across the inductor also vanishes as
The time constant
voltage is

also tells us how quickly the induced voltage decays. At

∞
the magnitude of the induced
14.29

The voltage across the inductor therefore drops to about
of its initial value after one time constant. The shorter
the time constant
the more rapidly the voltage decreases.
After enough time has elapsed so that the current has essentially reached its final value, the positions of the
switches in Figure 14.12(a) are reversed, giving us the circuit in part (c). At
the current in the circuit is
With Kirchhoff’s loop rule, we obtain
14.30
The solution to this equation is similar to the solution of the equation for a discharging capacitor, with similar
substitutions. The current at time t is then
14.31
The current starts at
14.14).

and decreases with time as the energy stored in the inductor is depleted (Figure

The time dependence of the voltage across the inductor can be determined from
14.32
This voltage is initially
, and it decays to zero like the current. The energy stored in the magnetic field of
the inductor,
also decreases exponentially with time, as it is dissipated by Joule heating in the resistance of
the circuit.

Access for free at openstax.org

14.4 • RL Circuits

FIGURE 14.14 Time variation of electric current in the RL circuit of Figure 14.12(c). The induced voltage across the coil also decays
exponentially.

EXAMPLE 14.4
An RL Circuit with a Source of emf
In the circuit of Figure 14.12(a), let
With
closed and
open (Figure
14.12(b)), (a) what is the time constant of the circuit? (b) What are the current in the circuit and the magnitude of
the induced emf across the inductor at

, and as

∞?

Strategy
The time constant for an inductor and resistor in a series circuit is calculated using Equation 14.25. The current
through and voltage across the inductor are calculated by the scenarios detailed from Equation 14.24 and Equation
14.32.
Solution
a. The inductive time constant is

b. The current in the circuit of Figure 14.12(b) increases according to Equation 14.24:

At

At

and

∞ we have, respectively,

and

∞
From Equation 14.32, the magnitude of the induced emf decays as

∞ we obtain

∞
Significance
If the time of the measurement were much larger than the time constant, we would not see the decay or growth of
the voltage across the inductor or resistor. The circuit would quickly reach the asymptotic values for both of these.
See Figure 14.15.

605

606

14 • Inductance

FIGURE 14.15 The figure shows voltage across a resistor in an RL circuit. We note that the voltage quickly reaches a constant voltage due to
the time of measurement scale being much larger than the time constant.

EXAMPLE 14.5
An RL Circuit without a Source of emf
After the current in the RL circuit of Example 14.4 has reached its final value, the positions of the switches are
reversed so that the circuit becomes the one shown in Figure 14.12(c). (a) How long does it take the current to drop
to half its initial value? (b) How long does it take before the energy stored in the inductor is reduced to
of its
maximum value?
Strategy
The current in the inductor will now decrease as the resistor dissipates this energy. Therefore, the current falls as an
exponential decay. We can also use that same relationship as a substitution for the energy in an inductor formula to
find how the energy decreases at different time intervals.
Solution
a. With the switches reversed, the current decreases according to

At a time t when the current is one-half its initial value, we have
and
where we have used the inductive time constant found in Example 14.4.
b. The energy stored in the inductor is given by

If the energy drops to

of its initial value at a time t, we have

Upon canceling terms and taking the natural logarithm of both sides, we obtain

so

Since
is

, the time it takes for the energy stored in the inductor to decrease to

Access for free at openstax.org

of its initial value

14.5 • Oscillations in an LC Circuit

Significance
This calculation only works if the circuit is at maximum current in situation (b) prior to this new situation. Otherwise,
we start with a lower initial current, which will decay by the same relationship.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 14.7
Verify that RC and L/R have the dimensions of time.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 14.8
(a) If the current in the circuit of in Figure 14.12(b) increases to
of its final value after 5.0 s, what is the
inductive time constant? (b) If
, what is the value of the self-inductance? (c) If the
resistor is
replaced with a
resister, what is the time taken for the current to reach
of its final value?

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 14.9
For the circuit of in Figure 14.12(b), show that when steady state is reached, the difference in the total energies
produced by the battery and dissipated in the resistor is equal to the energy stored in the magnetic field of the coil.

14.5 Oscillations in an LC Circuit
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain why charge or current oscillates between a capacitor and inductor, respectively, when wired in
series
• Describe the relationship between the charge and current oscillating between a capacitor and inductor
wired in series
It is worth noting that both capacitors and inductors store energy, in their electric and magnetic fields, respectively.
A circuit containing both an inductor (L) and a capacitor (C) can oscillate without a source of emf by shifting the
energy stored in the circuit between the electric and magnetic fields. Thus, the concepts we develop in this section
are directly applicable to the exchange of energy between the electric and magnetic fields in electromagnetic
waves, or light. We start with an idealized circuit of zero resistance that contains an inductor and a capacitor, an LC
circuit.
An LC circuit is shown in Figure 14.16. If the capacitor contains a charge
before the switch is closed, then all the
energy of the circuit is initially stored in the electric field of the capacitor (Figure 14.16(a)). This energy is
14.33
When the switch is closed, the capacitor begins to discharge, producing a current in the circuit. The current, in turn,
creates a magnetic field in the inductor. The net effect of this process is a transfer of energy from the capacitor, with
its diminishing electric field, to the inductor, with its increasing magnetic field.

607

608

14 • Inductance

FIGURE 14.16 (a–d) The oscillation of charge storage with changing directions of current in an LC circuit. (e) The graphs show the
distribution of charge and current between the capacitor and inductor.

In Figure 14.16(b), the capacitor is completely discharged and all the energy is stored in the magnetic field of the
inductor. At this instant, the current is at its maximum value
and the energy in the inductor is
14.34
Since there is no resistance in the circuit, no energy is lost through Joule heating; thus, the maximum energy stored
in the capacitor is equal to the maximum energy stored at a later time in the inductor:
14.35
At an arbitrary time when the capacitor charge is q(t) and the current is i(t), the total energy U in the circuit is given
by

Because there is no energy dissipation,
14.36
After reaching its maximum
the current i(t) continues to transport charge between the capacitor plates, thereby
recharging the capacitor. Since the inductor resists a change in current, current continues to flow, even though the
capacitor is discharged. This continued current causes the capacitor to charge with opposite polarity. The electric
field of the capacitor increases while the magnetic field of the inductor diminishes, and the overall effect is a
transfer of energy from the inductor back to the capacitor. From the law of energy conservation, the maximum
charge that the capacitor re-acquires is
However, as Figure 14.16(c) shows, the capacitor plates are charged

Access for free at openstax.org

14.5 • Oscillations in an LC Circuit

opposite to what they were initially.
When fully charged, the capacitor once again transfers its energy to the inductor until it is again completely
discharged, as shown in Figure 14.16(d). Then, in the last part of this cyclic process, energy flows back to the
capacitor, and the initial state of the circuit is restored.
We have followed the circuit through one complete cycle. Its electromagnetic oscillations are analogous to the
mechanical oscillations of a mass at the end of a spring. In this latter case, energy is transferred back and forth
between the mass, which has kinetic energy
, and the spring, which has potential energy
. With the
absence of friction in the mass-spring system, the oscillations would continue indefinitely. Similarly, the oscillations
of an LC circuit with no resistance would continue forever if undisturbed; however, this ideal zero-resistance LC
circuit is not practical, and any LC circuit will have at least a small resistance, which will radiate and lose energy over
time.
The frequency of the oscillations in a resistance-free LC circuit may be found by analogy with the mass-spring
system. For the circuit,
, the total electromagnetic energy U is
14.37
For the mass-spring system,

, the total mechanical energy E is
14.38

The equivalence of the two systems is clear. To go from the mechanical to the electromagnetic system, we simply
replace m by L, v by i, k by 1/C, and x by q. Now x(t) is given by
14.39
Hence, the charge on the capacitor in an LC circuit is given by

where

14.40
where the angular frequency of the oscillations in the circuit is
14.41

Finally, the current in the LC circuit is found by taking the time derivative of q(t):
14.42

The time variations of q and I are shown in Figure 14.16(e) for

.

EXAMPLE 14.6
An LC Circuit
In an LC circuit, the self-inductance is
H and the capacitance is
F. At
all of the
energy is stored in the capacitor, which has charge
C. (a) What is the angular frequency of the
oscillations in the circuit? (b) What is the maximum current flowing through circuit? (c) How long does it take the
capacitor to become completely discharged? (d) Find an equation that represents q(t).
Strategy
The angular frequency of the LC circuit is given by Equation 14.41. To find the maximum current, the maximum
energy in the capacitor is set equal to the maximum energy in the inductor. The time for the capacitor to become

609

610

14 • Inductance

discharged if it is initially charged is a quarter of the period of the cycle, so if we calculate the period of the
oscillation, we can find out what a quarter of that is to find this time. Lastly, knowing the initial charge and angular
frequency, we can set up a cosine equation to find q(t).
Solution
a. From Equation 14.41, the angular frequency of the oscillations is

b. The current is at its maximum
conservation,

when all the energy is stored in the inductor. From the law of energy

so

This result can also be found by an analogy to simple harmonic motion, where current and charge are the
velocity and position of an oscillator.
c. The capacitor becomes completely discharged in one-fourth of a cycle, or during a time T/4, where T is the
period of the oscillations. Since

the time taken for the capacitor to become fully discharged is
d. The capacitor is completely charged at
so
Using Equation 14.20, we obtain
Thus,

and

Significance
The energy relationship set up in part (b) is not the only way we can equate energies. At most times, some energy is
stored in the capacitor and some energy is stored in the inductor. We can put both terms on each side of the
equation. By examining the circuit only when there is no charge on the capacitor or no current in the inductor, we
simplify the energy equation.

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 14.10
The angular frequency of the oscillations in an LC circuit is
rad/s. (a) If
, what is C? (b)
Suppose that at
all the energy is stored in the inductor. What is the value of
(c) A second identical
capacitor is connected in parallel with the original capacitor. What is the angular frequency of this circuit?

14.6 RLC Series Circuits
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Determine the angular frequency of oscillation for a resistor, inductor, capacitor
• Relate the
circuit to a damped spring oscillation

series circuit

When the switch is closed in the RLC circuit of Figure 14.17(a), the capacitor begins to discharge and
electromagnetic energy is dissipated by the resistor at a rate
. With U given by Equation 14.37, we have

Access for free at openstax.org

